# Section 1.4

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 1: Structure and Function of Body Systems

**Section:** 1.4 -- Respiratory System

**PDF Pages:** 81--95

Pleural press ure is the pressure in the narrow space between
the lung pleura and the chest wall pleura  (memb ranes enveloping
the lungs and lining the chest walls). This pressure is normal ly
slightly negativ e. Because the lung is an elastic structur e, during
normal inspir ation the expan sion of the chest cage can pull on the
surface of the lungs and create a more negativ e pressure, thus
enhancing inspir ation. During expiration, the events are essential ly
reversed (41).
Alveolar pressure is the pressure inside the alveoli when the
glottis is open, and no air is flowing into or out of the lungs. In fact,
in this instance the pressure in all parts of the respiratory tree is the
same all the way to the alveoli and is equal to the atmospheric
pressure. To cause inward flow of air during inspir ation, the pressure
in the alveoli must fall to a value slightly below atmospheric
pressure. During expiration, alveolar pressure must rise above
atmospheric pr essure (41).
During normal respiration at rest, only 3% to 5% of the total
energy expended by the body is required for pulmonary ventilation.
During very heavy exercise, however, the amount of energy required
can increase to as much as 8% to 15% of total body energy
expendi ture, especial ly if the person has any degree of increased
airway resistance, as occurs with exercise-induced asthma.
Precautions, including physician evaluation of the athlete, are often
recommended, depending on the potential lev el of impairment.
Exchange of Respiratory Gases
With ventilation, oxygen diffuses from the alveoli into the pulmonary
blood, and carbon dioxide diffuses from the blood into the alveoli.
The process of diffusion  is a simple random motion of molecules
moving in opposi te directions through the alveolar capillary
membr ane. The energy for diffusion is provided by the kinetic
motion of the molecules themselves. Net diffusion of the gas occurs
from the region of high concentr ation to the region of low
concentr ation. The rates of diffusion of the two gases depend on
81
their concentr ations in the capillaries and alveoli and the partial
pressure of each gas (41).
At rest, the partial pressure of oxygen in the alveoli is about 60
mmHg greater than that in the pulmonary capillaries. Thus, oxygen
diffuses into the pulmonary capillary blood. Similarly, carbon dioxide
diffuses in the opposi te direction. This process of gas exchange is so
rapid as to be thought of as instantaneous (41).
82
Acute Responses to Aerobic Exercise
A single bout of aerobic exercise places a significant metabol ic
demand on the body, especial ly the cardiovascular , respiratory, and
muscular systems. Repeated exposur e to the acute stress of exercise
that occurs with chronic exercise training results in many changes in
the function and responses of all body systems. A basic knowledge
of the acute effects of aerobic exercise provides the foundation for
an understand ing of the chronic adaptations that are discussed in
chapter 6 .
Cardiovascular Responses
The primary functions of the cardiovascular system during aerobic
exercise are to deliver oxygen and other nutrients to the working
muscles and remove metabol ites and waste products. This section
describes the car diovascular mechanisms of these acute r esponses.
Cardiac Output
Cardiac output  is the amoun t of blood pumped by the heart in
liters per minute and is determined by the quanti ty of blood ejected
with each beat (stroke volume ) and the heart’s rate of pumping
(heart rate ):
Q̇ = Stroke volume  × Heart rate (1.1)
where Q̇ is the cardiac output. Stroke volume is measur ed in
milliliters of blood per beat, and heart rate is measur ed in beats
(contr actions) per minute (17).
In the progression from rest to steady -state aerobic exercise,
cardiac output initially increases rapidly , then more gradual ly, and
subsequently reaches a plateau. With maximal exercise, cardiac
output may increase to four times the resting level of about 5 L/min
to a maximum of 20 to 22 L/min (1). Stroke volume begins to
increase at the onset of exercise and continues to rise until the
individual’ s oxygen consumpt ion is at approximately 40% to 50% of
83
maximal oxygen uptak e (1). At that point, stroke volume begins to
plateau. Sedentary college-aged men have maximal stroke volumes
averaging between 100 and 120 mL of blood per beat; maximal
stroke volumes for college-aged women are approximately 25% less,
due to a smaller average body size as well as a smaller heart muscle
(32). The effect of training on the responses to exercise is marked,
and we see an increase in maximal stroke volume for college-aged
men up to 150 to 160 mL per beat and approximately 100 to 110 for
college-aged women (32).
Stroke Volume
Two physiological mechanisms are responsible for the regulation of
stroke volume. The first is a result of the end-diastolic volume ,
the volume of blood available to be pumped by the left ventricle at
the end of the filling phase, or diastole. The second is due to the
action of catecholamines, including epinephrine and norepinephrine,
which are hormones of the sympathetic nervous system that
produce a more forceful ventricular contraction and greater systol ic
emptying of the heart.
At the onset of exercise, or even with the anticipation of exercise,
sympathetic stimulation increases myocardial contractility and
consequently increases stroke volume (14, 27). With prolonged
aerobic exercise, the amount of blood returning to the heart (also
called venous return ) is increased  due to a combination of
venoconstriction (induced via increased sympathetic nervous system
activation) (2), the skeletal muscle pump (muscular contractions
combine with one-way venous valves to “push” more blood to the
heart during exercise (16), and the respiratory pump (increased
respiratory frequency and tidal volume) (28). These responses result
in pressure alterations on the chambers of the heart and thoracic
vena cava, which promote increased venous return (28), and thus
end-diastol ic volume is significantly increased. With the increased
volume, the myocardial fibers become more stretched than at rest,
resulting in a more forceful contraction, an increase in force of
84
systol ic ejection, and greater cardiac emptying (17). This principle,
called the Frank-Starling mechanism , is related to the concept
that the force of contraction is a function of the length of the fibers
of the muscle wall. This increase in cardiac emptying is characteriz ed
by an increase in the ejection fraction , or the fraction of the end-
diastol ic volume ejected f rom the heart (14 , 17).
Heart Rate
Just before and at the begin ning of an exercise session, a reflex or
anticipatory stimulation of the sympathetic nervous system results in
an increase in heart rate. Heart rate increases linearly with increases
in intensi ty during aerobic exercise (14). The rate of increase in
heart rate, the actual heart rate response, and the maximal heart
rate achiev ed relate to a variety of individual characteris tics of the
human system, including fitness and age, in addition to exercise
workload.
How Can Athletes Estimate Maximal Heart
Rate?
A simple estimate of maximal heart rate is to subtract one’s age from 220; for
example, the estimated maximal heart r ate for a 47- year-old person is
220 – 47 (age in y ears) = 173 beats/min.
The variance, or standar d deviation, around this estimate is ±10 to 12 beats/min;
thus the actual maximal heart rate for this individual could be expected to fall
within the range of 161 to 185 beats/min. A meta- analysis determined that the
equation 208 – 0.7 × age could be used in healthy adults to more accurately
predict maximal heart r ate (40).
Oxygen Up take
Oxygen uptake  is the amount of oxygen consumed by the body’s
tissues. The oxygen demand of working muscles increases during an
acute bout of aerobic exercise and is directly related to the mass of
exercising muscle, metabol ic efficiency , and exercise intensi ty.
Aerobic exercise involving larger muscles is likely to be associated
85
with a higher total oxygen uptak e. Increased metabol ic efficiency
allows for an increase in oxygen uptak e, especial ly at maximal
exercise.
Maximal oxygen uptake  is the greatest amount of oxygen that
can be used at the cellular level for the entire body. Maximal oxygen
uptak e has been found to correlate well with the degree of aerobic
condi tioning and is recogniz ed as the most widely accepte d measur e
of cardiorespiratory fitness (14). The capaci ty to use oxygen is
largely related to the ability of the heart and circulatory system to
transport oxygen. Howev er, muscular characteristics such as muscle
fiber type, muscle fiber mitochondrial density, and capillary density in
muscle tissue also affect maximal oxygen uptak e. Resting oxygen
uptak e is estimated at 3.5 mL of oxygen per kilogram of body weight
per minute (mL · kg−1 · min−1) for an average person; this value is
defined as 1 metabolic equivalent (MET) . Maximal oxygen
uptak e values in normal, healthy individuals gener ally range from 25
to 80 mL · kg−1 · min−1, or 7.1 to 22.9 METs, and depend on a
variety of physiological parameters, including age and conditioning
level (17).
Oxygen uptak e (V̇O2) can be calculated with the Fick equation ,
which expresses the relationship of cardiac output, oxygen uptak e,
and arterio venous o xygen di fference:
V̇O2 = Q̇ × a-vO2 difference    (1.2)
where Q̇ is the cardiac output in milliliters per minute and a-vO2
difference is the arteriovenous oxygen difference  (the difference
in the oxygen content between arterial and venous blood) in
milliliters of oxygen per 100 mL of blood. Recalling equation 1.1, we
can calculate o xygen uptak e as shown in the f ollowing example:
V̇O2 = Heart rate × Stroke volume × a- vO2 difference
V̇O2 = 72 beats/min × 65 mL blood/beat × 6 mL O 2/100 mL blood = 281
mL O 2/min
To express oxygen uptak e in its common unit (i.e., mL · kg−1 ·
min−1), we would then divide the result by the person’ s weight in
86
kilograms. This is an example for an 80 kilogram (176 pound)
athlete:
V̇O2 = 281 mL O 2/min ÷ 80 kg
V̇O2 = 3.5 mL · kg−1 · min−1
Blood Pressure
Systolic blood pressure  estima tes the pressure exerted against
the arterial walls as blood is forcefully ejected during ventricular
contraction (systole) and, when combined with heart rate, can be
used to describe the myocardial oxygen consumption (work) of the
heart. This estimate of the work of the heart is obtained according
to the following equation and is referred to as the rate–pressure
product , or double product :
Rate–pressure product =     Heart rate × Systolic blood pressure    (1.3)
Diastolic blood pressure  is used to estimate the pressure
exerted against the arterial walls when no blood is being forcefully
ejected through the vessels (diastole). Diastol ic blood  pressure
provides an indication of peripheral resistance and can decrease with
aerobic exercise due to vasodilation. In systemic circulation, pressure
is highe st in the aorta and arteries and rapidly falls off within the
venous circulation. Also, because pumping by the heart is pulsati le,
resting arterial pressure on average fluctuates between a systol ic
level of 120 mmHg and a diastolic level of 80 mmHg (approximate
values). As the blood flow continues through the systemic
circulation, its pressure falls progressively to nearly 0 mmHg (venous
pressure) by the time it reaches the termination of the vena cava in
the right atrium (17).
The mean arterial pressure  is the average blood pressure
throughout the cardiac cycle (equation 1.4). Mean arterial pressure
is not the average of systol ic and diastol ic pressures, because the
arterial pressure usually remains nearer the diastol ic level than the
systol ic level during a greater portion of the cardiac cycle. Thus, the
87
mean arterial pressure is usually less than the average of the systol ic
and diastol ic pressures.
Mean arterial blood pressure = [(Systolic blood pressure − Diastolic blood
pressure) ÷ 3] + Diastolic blood pressure    (1.4)
Normal resting  blood pressure gener ally ranges from 110 to 139
mmHg systol ic and from 60 to 89 mmHg diastol ic. With maximal
aerobic exercise, systol ic pressure can normal ly rise to as much as
220 to 260 mmHg, while diastol ic pressure remains at the resting
level or decr eases sl ightly (17 , 27).
Control of Local Circulation
Resistance to blood flow is also increased with increasing viscosi ty of
the blood and the length of the vessel. Howev er, these factors
remain relatively constant under most circumstances. Thus,
vasoconstriction  (reduction in vessel diameter) and vasodilation
(increase in vessel diameter) are the primary mechanisms for
regulating r egional blood flow .
During aerobic exercise, blood flow to active muscles is
consider ably increased by the dilation of local arterioles; at the same
time, blood flow to other organ systems is reduced by constriction of
the arterioles. A t rest, 15% to 20% of car diac output is distributed to
skeletal muscle, whereas with vigorous exercise this value may rise
to 90% of car diac output (14 , 27).
Acute aerobic exercise results in increased cardiac
output, stroke volume, heart rate, oxygen uptake,
systolic blood pressure, and blood flow to active muscles
and a decrease in diastolic blood pressure.
Respiratory Responses
Aerobic exercise provides for the greatest impact on both oxygen
uptak e and carbon dioxide production as compar ed to other types of
exercise, such as anaer obic resistance training. Significant increases
88
in oxygen delivered to the tissue, carbon dioxide returned to the
lungs, and minute venti lation  (the volume of air breathe d per
minute) provide for appropriate levels of alveolar gas concentr ations
during aer obic ex ercise (27).
With aerobic exercise, increased minute ventilation occurs as a
result of increases in the depth of breathing, frequency of breathing,
or both. During strenuous exercise, the breathing frequency of
healthy young adults usually increases from 12 to 15 breaths per
minute at rest to 35 to 45 breaths per minute, while tidal volume
(TV), the amount of air inhaled and exhaled with each breath,
increases from resting values of 0.4 to 1 L to as much as 3 L or
greater. Conse quently , the minute ventilation can increase to 15 to
25 times the resting value, or to values of 90 to 150 L of air per
minute (14 , 17, 27).
During low- to moder ate-intensi ty aerobic exercise, there is an
increase in ventilation directly associated with both increased oxygen
uptak e and carbon dioxide production. In this instance, the increase
in ventilation is primari ly due to increased tidal volume. The ratio of
minute ventilation to oxygen uptak e is termed the ventilatory
equivalent  and ranges between 20 and 25 L of air per L of oxygen
consumed. In more intense exercise (gener ally above 45% to 65%
of maximal oxygen uptak e in untrained individuals and 70% to 90%
in trained athletes), breathing frequency takes on a greater role. At
these levels, minute ventilation rises disproportionate ly to the
increases in oxygen uptak e and begins to parallel the abrupt rise in
blood lactate. At this point, the ventilatory equiv alent may increase
to 35 or 40 L of air per L of oxygen consumed with this high-
intensi ty activi ty (14, 27).
With inspiration, air enters the alveoli, the functional unit of the
pulmonary system where gas exchange occurs. However, with
inspir ation, air also occupies areas of the respiratory passages: the
nose, mouth, trachea, bronchi, and bronchioles. This area is not
functional for gas exchange and is called the anatomical dead
space . The normal volume of this air space is approximately 150 mL
89
in young adults and increases with age. Because the respiratory
passages stretch with deep breathing, the anatomical dead space
increases as tidal volume increases (figure 1.16). Nevertheless, the
increase in tidal volume with deep breathing is proportionately
greater than any increase in anatomical dead space. Thus,
increasing tidal volume (deeper breathing) provides for more
efficient ventilation than increasing frequency of breathing alone (17,
27).
Physiological dead space  refers to alveoli in which poor blood
flow, poor ventilation, or other problems with the alveolar surface
impair gas exchange. The physiological dead space in the lungs of
healthy people is usually negligible because all or nearly all alveoli
are functional. Certain types of lung disease such as chronic
obstructiv e lung disease or pneumonia can significantly reduce
alveolar functio n, increasing physiological dead space by as much as
10 times the v olume of anatomical dead space (17 , 27).
During aerobic exercise, large amounts of oxygen
diffuse from the capillaries into the tissues; increased
levels of carbon dioxide move from the blood into the
alveoli; and minute ventilation increases to maintain
appropriate alveolar concentrations of these gases.
90
FIGURE 1.16 Distribution of tidal volume in a healthy athlete at rest. The tidal volume
comprises about 350 mL of room air that mixes with alveolar air, about 150 mL of air in the
larger passages (anatomical dead space), and a small portion of air distrib uted to either
poorly v entilated or incompletely fi lled alv eoli (physiological dead space).
Gas Responses
Diffusion is the movement of oxygen and carbon dioxide across a
cell membrane and is a function of the concentr ation of each gas
and the resulting partial pressure exerted by the molecular motion of
each gas. Diffusion results from the movement of gas from high
concentr ation to low concentr ation. At the tissue level, where oxygen
is used in metabolism and carbon dioxide is produced, the partial
pressures of these gases in some instances differ consider ably from
those in arterial blood (figure 1.17). At rest, the partial pressure of
oxygen in the intersti tial fluid (fluid between muscle fibers) rapidly
drops from 100 mmHg in arterial blood to as low as 40 mmHg, while
the partial pressure of carbon dioxide is elevated above that of
arterial blood to about 46 mmHg. During high-intensi ty aerobic
exercise, the partial pressures of these gases are approximately 3
mmHg for oxygen and 90 mmHg for carbon dioxide. Consequently ,
91
these pressure gradients cause the movement of gases across cell
membr anes. In addition, the diffusing capaci ties of oxygen and, in
particular , carbon dioxide increase dramatical ly with exercise, which
facilitates their ex change (14 , 17, 27).
FIGURE 1.17 Pressure gradient s for gas transfer in the body at rest. The pressures of
oxygen (PO2) and carbon dioxide (PCO 2) in alveolar air, venous and arterial blood, and
muscle tissue ar e shown.
Blood Transport of Gases and Metabolic
By-Products
Oxygen is carried in blood  either dissolv ed in the plasma or
combined with hemoglobin. Because oxygen is not readily soluble in
fluids, only about 3 mL of oxygen can be carried per liter of plasma.
92
Nonetheless, this limited amount of oxygen transported in plasma
contributes to the partial pressure of oxygen in blood and other body
fluids, thus playing a role in the mechanisms that regulate  breathing
and in the diffusion of oxygen into alveolar blood and the cells of
body tissues (17 , 27).
Given the limited capaci ty of plasma to carry oxygen, the majori ty
of oxygen in blood is carried by the hemoglobin. Men have about 15
to 16 g of hemoglobin per 100 mL of blood, and women have about
14 g of hemoglobin per 100 mL of blood. One gram of hemoglobin
can carry 1.34 mL of oxygen; thus, the oxygen-carrying capaci ty of
100 mL of blood is about 20 mL of oxygen in men and a little less in
women (27).
The way in which carbon dioxide is removed from the system has
some similarities to oxygen transport, but the vast amount of carbon
dioxide is removed by a more complex process. After carbon dioxide
is formed in the cell, it easily diffuses across the cell membr anes and
is subsequently transported to the lungs. As with oxygen, only a
limited quanti ty of carbon dioxide— about 5% of that produced
during metabol ism—is carried in the plasma; similar to the situation
with oxygen, this limited amount of carbon dioxide contributes to
establ ishing the partial pressure of carbon dioxide in the blood.
Some carbon dioxide is also transported via hemoglobi n, but this
amount is l imited (27).
The greatest amount of carbon dioxide removal (appr oximately
70%) is f rom the combination wi th water and del ivery to the lungs in
the form of bicarbonate (HCO 3−). The initial step in this reversible
reaction is the combination of carbon dioxide in solution with water
in the red blood cells to form carbonic acid. The reaction would
normal ly be quite slow except for the impact of the enzyme carbonic
anhydrase, which significantly speeds up this process. Once carbonic
acid is formed, it is broken down to hydrogen ions and bicarbonate
ions. Because hemoglobin is a significant acid–base buffer, hydrogen
ions combine with hemoglob in. This process helps to maintain the
pH of the blood. Bicarbonate  ions diffuse from the red blood cells to
93
the plasma, while chloride ions diffuse into the blood cells to replace
them (17 , 27).
94
Cardiovascular and Respiratory
Responses to Anaerobic Exercise
Acute bouts of anaer obic exercise and long-term anaer obic training
both have a significant impact on cardiovascular and respiratory
function. This is reflected in both anaer obic athletes  (12) and
sedentary individuals (22), where enhanced cardiac function and
dimensions are appar ent. Heavy-load resistance training, resistance
training with more repetitions of light loads and less rest, and
conventional aerobic endur ance training are all beneficial to the
cardiovascular system but in different ways (13). Improved ability of
the heart, lungs, and circulatory system to function under condi tions
of high pressure and force production can prepare the athlete’ s body
for the extr eme demands of sporting competi tion.
Acute Cardiovascular Responses to
Anaerobic Exercise
An acute bout of anaer obic exercise significantly increases
cardiovascular responses. Heart rate, stroke volume, cardiac output,
and blood pressure all increase significantly during resistance
exercise. Peak blood pressures of 320/250 mmHg and a heart rate of
170 beats/min have been reported during a high-intensi ty (i.e., 95%
of 1RM) leg press exercise (26). Gener ally, the blood pressure
response increases nonlinearly with the magni tude of active muscle
mass and is higher during the concentric phase of each repetition
than during the eccentric phase, especial ly at the “sticking point” of
an exercise. Although large elevations in blood pressure have been
reported during exercise bouts themselv es, there are limited data to
indicate that resistance training has any negativ e effects on resting
blood pressure (6). In addition, intrathoracic pressure increases, and
plasma volume  reductions of up to 22% have been reported (34,
36).
95