# Section 1.3

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 1: Structure and Function of Body Systems

**Section:** 1.3 -- Cardiovascular System

**PDF Pages:** 66--80

must be activated in order to overcome a given resistance. As a load
increases, the muscle is stretched to a greater extent, and
engagement of muscle spindles results in greater activation of the
muscle. Muscles that perform precise movements have many
spindles per unit of mass to help ensur e exact control of their
contractile activity. A simple example of muscle spindle activity is the
knee jerk reflex. Tapping on the tendon of the knee extensor muscle
group below the patella stretches the muscle spindle fibers. This
causes activation of extrafusal muscle fibers in the same muscle. A
knee jerk occurs as these fibers actively shorten. This, in turn,
shortens the intr afusal fibers and causes their dischar ge to cease.
FIGURE 1.10 Muscle spindle. When a muscle is stretched, deformation of the muscle
spindle activates the sensory neuron, which sends an impulse to the spinal cord, where it
synapses wi th a motor neur on, causing the muscle to contr act.
66
How Can Athletes Improve Force
Production?
Incorpor ate phases of training that use heavier loads (or explosiv e actions) to
optimiz e motor uni t recruitment and firing f requency pat terns
Also incorpor ate phases of training that promote skeletal muscular
hypertr ophy given that more myofibrils (and thus more actin-m yosin
crossbridges) wi ll be a vailable f or near -maximal muscle contr actions
Finally, implement training methods that specifically target movements where
increases in force are desired (e.g., heavy bench press and back squat
exercises f or incr easing pushing f orces)
Golgi Tendon Organs
Golgi tendon organs (GTOs)  are proprioc eptors located in
tendons near the myotendinous junction and are in series—that is,
attached end to end, with extrafusal muscle fibers (figure 1.10).
Golgi tendon organs are activated when the tendon attached to an
active muscle is stretched. As tension in the muscle and tendons
increases, the dischar ge of the GTOs increases. The sensory neuron
of the GTO synapses with an inhibi tory interneur on in the spinal
cord, which in turn synapses with and inhibi ts a motor neuron that
serves the same muscle. The result is a reduction in tension within
the muscle and tendon. Thus, whereas spindles facilitate activation
of the muscle, neural input from GTOs inhibi ts muscle activation.
The GTOs’ inhibi tory process is thought to provide a mechanism that
protects against the development of excessiv e tension. The effect of
GTOs is therefore minimal at low forces, but when an extremely
heavy load is placed on the muscle, reflexiv e inhibi tion mediated by
the GTOs causes the muscle to relax. The ability of the motor cortex
to override this inhibi tion may be one of the fundamental
adaptations to hea vy resistance tr aining.
67
Cardiovascular System
The primary roles of the cardiovascular system are to transport
nutrients and remove waste and by-products while assisting with
maintaining the environment for all the body’s functions. The
cardiovascular system plays key roles in the regulation of the body’s
acid–base system, fluids, and temper ature, as well as a variety of
other physiological functions. This section describes the anatom y
and ph ysiology of the heart and the blood v essels.
Heart
The heart is a muscular organ composed of two interconnected but
separ ate pump s; the right side of the heart pumps blood through
the lungs, and the left side pumps blood through the rest of the
body. Each pump has two chambers: an atrium  and a ventricle
(figure 1.11). The right and left atria deliver blood into the right and
left ventricles. The right and left ventricles supply the main force for
moving blood through the pulmonary and peripher al circulations,
respectiv ely (41).
Valves
The tricuspid valve  and mitral valve  (bicuspid valve) (collectively
called atrioventricular [AV] valves ) prevent the flow of blood
from the ventricles back into the atria during ventricular contraction
(systole ). The aortic valve  and pulmonary valve (collectively,
the semilunar valves ) prevent backflow from the aorta and
pulmonary arteries into the ventricles during ventricular relaxation
(diastole ). Each valve opens and closes passiv ely; that is, each
closes when a backw ard pressure gradient pushes blood back
against it, opening when a forward pressure gradient forces blood in
the forward direction (41).
68
Conduction System
A special ized electrical conduction system (figure 1.12) controls the
mechanical contraction of the heart. The conduction system is
composed of
the sinoatrial (SA) node —the intrinsic pacemak er—where
rhythmic electrical impulses ar e normal ly initiated;
the internodal pathways that conduct the impulse from the SA
node to the atrio ventricular node;
the atrioventricular (AV) node , where the impulse is
delayed slightly bef ore passing into the v entricles;
the atrioventricular (AV) bundle , which conducts the
impulse to the v entricles; and
the left bundle branch  and right bundle branch , which
further divide into the Purkinje fibers  and conduct impulses
to all parts of the v entricles.
The SA node is a small area of special ized muscle tissue located in
the upper lateral wall of the right atrium. The fibers of the node are
contiguous with the muscle fibers of the atrium, with the result that
each electrical impulse that begins in the SA node normal ly spreads
immediately into the atria. The conductiv e system is organized so
that the impulse does not travel into the ventricles too rapidly ,
allowing time for the atria to contract and empty blood into the
ventricles before ventricular contraction begins. It is primari ly the AV
node and its associated conductiv e fibers that delay each impulse
entering into the ventricles. The AV node is located in the posterior
septal w all of the right atrium (41).
The left and right bundle branches lead from the AV bundle into
the ventricles. Except for their initial portion, where they penetr ate
the AV barrier , these conduction fibers have functional characteristics
quite opposi te those of the AV nodal fibers. They are large and
transmi t impulses at a much higher velocity than the AV nodal fibers.
Because these fibers give way to the Purkinje fibers, which more
completely penetr ate the ventricles, the impulse travels quickly
69
throughout the entire ventricular system and causes both ventricles
to contr act at appr oximately the same time (41).
The SA node normal ly controls heart rhythmici ty because its
dischar ge rate is consider ably greater (60-80 times per minute) than
that of either the AV node (40-60 times per minute) or the
ventricular fibers (15-40 times per minute). Each time the SA node
dischar ges, its impulse is conducted into the AV node and the
ventricular fibers, dischar ging their excitable membr anes. Thus,
these potential ly self-excitatory tissues are dischar ged before self-
excitation can actual ly occur.
70
FIGURE 1.11 Structur e of the human heart and the course of blood flow through its
chambers.
71
FIGURE 1.12  The electrical conduction system of the heart.
The inherent rhythmici ty and conduction properties of the
myocardium  (heart muscle) are influenced by the cardiovascular
center of the medul la, which transmi ts signals to the heart through
the sympathetic  and parasympathetic nervous  systems , both
of which are components of the autonomic nervous system. The
atria are supplied with a large number of both sympathetic and
parasympathetic neurons, whereas the ventricles receive
sympathetic fibers almost exclusiv ely. Stimulation of the sympathetic
nerves accelerates depolarization of the SA node (the chronotropic
effect), which causes the heart to beat faster. Stimulation of the
parasympathetic nervous system slows the rate of SA node
dischar ge, which slows the heart rate. The resting heart rate
normal ly ranges from 60 to 100 beats/min; fewer than 60 beats/min
is called bradycardia , and more than 100 beats/min is called
tachycardia .
72
Electrocardiogram
The electrical activity of the heart can be recorded at the surface of
the body; a graphic representation of this activity is called an
electrocardiogram (ECG) . A normal ECG, seen in figure 1.13, is
composed of a P-wave , a QRS complex  (the QRS complex is often
three separate waves: a Q-wave, an R-wave, and an S-wave), and a
T-wave . The P-wave and the QRS complex are recordings of
electrical depolarization—that is, the electrical stimulus that leads to
mechanical contraction. Depolarization  is the reversal of the
membr ane electrical potential, whereby the normal ly negativ e
potential inside the membr ane becomes slightly positive and the
outside becom es slightly negativ e. The P-wave is gener ated by the
changes in the electrical potential of cardiac muscle cells that
depolariz e the atria and result in atrial contraction. The QRS complex
is generated by the electrical potential that depolariz es the ventricles
and results in ventricular contraction. In contrast, the T-wave is
caused by the electrical potential gener ated as the ventricles recover
from the state of depolarization; this process, called
repolarization , occurs in ventricular muscle shortly after
depolarization. Although atrial repolarization occurs as well, its wave
formation usually occurs during the time of ventricular depolarization
and is thus mask ed by the QRS complex (41).
73
FIGURE 1.13  Normal electr ocardiogram.
Blood Vessels
The central and peripher al circulation form a single closed-cir cuit
system with two components: an arterial system , which carries
blood away from the heart, and a venous system , which returns
blood toward the heart (figure 1.14). The blood vessels of each
system ar e identi fied her e.
74
FIGURE 1.14 The arterial (right) and venous (left) components of the circulatory system.
The percent values indicate the distribution of blood volume throughout the circulatory
system at r est.
Arteries
The function of arteries  is to rapidly transport blood pumped from
the heart. Because blood pumped from the heart is under relatively
high pressure, arteries have strong, muscular walls. Small branches
of arteries called arterioles  act as control vessels through which
blood enters the capillaries. Arterioles play a major role in the
regulation of blood flow to the capillaries. Arterioles have strong,
muscular walls that are capable of closing the arteriole completely or
allowing it to be dilated many times their size, thus vastly altering
blood flow to the capillaries in response to the needs of the tissues
(41).
75
Capillaries
The function of capillaries  is to facilitate exchange of oxygen, fluid,
nutrients, electr olytes, hormones, and other substances between the
blood and the intersti tial fluid in the various tissues of the body. The
capillary walls are very thin and are permeable to these, but not all,
substances (41).
Veins
Venules  collect blood from the capillaries and gradual ly converge
into the progressively larger veins , which transport blood back to
the heart. Because the pressure in the venous system is very low,
venous walls are thin, although muscular . This allows them to
constrict or dilate to a great degree and thereby act as a reserv oir
for blood, either in small or in large amounts (41). In addition, some
veins, such as those in the legs, contain one-way valves that help
maintain v enous r eturn b y preventing r etrograde blood flow .
What Is the Skelet al Muscle Pump?
The skeletal muscle pump is the assista nce that contracting muscles provide to the
circulatory system. The muscle pump works with the venous system, which
contains the one-way valves for blood return to the heart. The contracting muscle
compr esses the veins, but since the blood can flow only in the direction of the
valves, it is returned to the heart. This mechanism is one of the reasons why it is
important to periodical ly contract leg muscles or to take walking breaks during
prolonged sitting. These activities act to prevent blood pooling in the legs and
facilitate v enous blood r eturn to the heart.
The cardiova scular system transports nutrients and
removes waste products while helping to maintai n the
environment for all the body’s functions. The blood
transports oxygen from the lungs to the tissues for use
in cellular metabolism. Blood also transports carbon
dioxide (mainly as bicarbonate ions) from the
76
metabolically active tissues to the lungs, where it is
removed from the body.
Blood
Two paramount functions of blood are the transport of oxygen from
the lungs to the tissues for use in cellular metabol ism and the
removal of carbon dioxide, the most abundant by-product of
metabol ism, from the tissues to the lungs. The transport of oxygen
is accomplished by hemoglobin , the iron–pr otein molecule carried
by the red blood cells. Hemoglobin also has an additional important
role as an acid–base buffer, a regulator of hydrogen ion
concentr ation, which is crucial to the rates of chemical reactions in
cells. Red blood cells, the major component of blood, have other
functions as well. For instance, they contain a large quanti ty of
carbonic anhydrase, which catalyz es the reaction betwe en carbon
dioxide and w ater to f acilitate carbon dio xide r emoval.
77
Respiratory System
The primary function of the respiratory system is the basic exchange
of oxygen and carbon dioxide. The anatom y of the human
respiratory system is shown in figure 1.15. As air passes  through the
nose, the nasal cavities perform three distinct functions: warming,
humidi fying, and purifying the air (41). Air is distributed to the lungs
by way of the trachea, bronchi, and bronchioles. The trachea  is
called the first-gener ation respiratory passage , and the right and left
main bronchi  are the second-gener ation passages; each division
thereafter is an additional gener ation (bronchioles ). There are
approximately 23 gener ations before the air finally reaches the
alveoli , wher e gases ar e exchanged in r espiration (41).
The primary function of the respiratory system is the
basic exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide.
Exchange of Air
The amount and movement of air and expired gases in and out of
the lungs are controlled by expansion and recoil of the lungs. The
lungs do not actively expand and recoil themselv es but rather are
acted on to do so in two ways: by down ward and upward movement
of the diaphr agm to lengthe n and shorten the chest cavity and by
elevation and depression of the ribs to increase and decrease the
back-to-front diameter of the chest cavity (41). Normal, quiet
breathing is accompl ished almost entirely by movement of the
diaphr agm. During inspir ation, contraction of the diaphr agm creates
a negative pressure (vacuum ) in the chest cavity, and air is drawn
into the lungs. During expiration, the diaphr agm simply relaxes; the
elastic recoil of the lungs, chest wall, and abdominal structur es
compr esses the lungs, and air is expelled. During heavy breathing,
the elastic forces alone are not powerf ul enough to provide the
necessary respiratory response. The extra required force is achiev ed
78
mainly by contraction of the abdominal muscles, which push the
abdomen upw ard against the bot tom of the diaphr agm (41).
The second method for expanding the lungs is to raise the rib
cage. Because  the chest cavity is small and the ribs are slanted
down ward while in the resting position, elevating the rib cage allows
the ribs to project almost directly forward so that the sternum can
move forward and away from the spine. The muscles that elevate
the rib cage are called muscles of inspir ation and include the
external intercostals, the sternocleidomastoids, the anterior serrati,
and the scaleni. The muscles  that depress the chest are muscles of
expiration and include the abdominal muscles (rectus abdominis,
external and internal obliques, and transversus abdominis) and the
internal inter costals (41).
79
FIGURE 1.15  Gross anatom y of the human r espiratory system.
How Important Is It to Train the Muscles
of Respiration?
Regular exercise in gener al is beneficial for maintaining respiratory muscle
function. Both endur ance exercise, which involves repetitive contraction of
breathing muscles, and resistance exercise, which taxes the diaphr agm and
abdominal muscles  especial ly because of their use for stabilization and for
increasing intra-abdominal pressure (Valsalv a maneuv er), can result in some
muscle training adaptations. This can help to preserv e some of the pulmonary
function wi th aging.
80