# Chapter 1: Structure and Function of Body Systems

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

**PDF Pages:** 38--103

CHAPTER  1
STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION
OF BODY SYSTEMS
Michael D. Roberts, PhD
The author would like to acknowledge the significant contributions of N. Travis Triplett,
Duncan French, Ann Swank, Carwyn P.M. Sharp , Robert T. Harris, and Gary R. Hunter to
this chapter .
After completing this chapter, you will be able to
describe both the macr ostructur e and micr ostructur e of muscle
and bone;
describe the sl iding-fi lament theory of muscular contr action;
describe the speci fic morphological and ph ysiological
characteristics of di fferent muscle fiber t ypes and pr edict their
relative involvement in di fferent sport ev ents;
describe the anatomical and ph ysiological char acteristics of the
cardiovascular and r espiratory systems; and
predict the car diorespiratory r esponses to di fferent types of
exercise or sports ev ents.
Physical exercise and sport performance involve effective, purposef ul
movements of the body. These movements result from the forces
developed in muscles, which move the various body parts by acting
through lever systems of the skeleton. Skeletal muscle activation
38
initiates in upper motor neurons located in the cerebral cortex, and
activation signals are relayed to lower motor neurons residing in the
spinal cord that are part of the peripher al nervous system . Support
for this neuromuscular activity involves continuous delivery of
oxygen and nutrients to working tissues and removal of carbon
dioxide and metabol ic waste by-products from worki ng tissues
through activi ties of the car diovascular and r espiratory systems.
In order to best apply the available scienti fic knowledge  to the
training of athletes and the development of effective training
programs, strength and condi tioning professionals must have a basic
understanding of not only musculosk eletal function but also those
systems of the body that directly support the work of exercising
muscle. Accordingly , this chapter summariz es those aspects of the
anatom y and function of the musculosk eletal, neuromuscular ,
cardiovascular , and respiratory systems that are essential for
developing and maintaining muscular f orce and power .
39
Musculoskelet al System
The musculosk eletal system of the human body consists of bones,
joints, muscles, and tendons configur ed to allow the great variety of
movements characteristic of human activity. This section describes
the various components of the musculosk eletal system, both
individual ly and in the context of how they f unction together .
Skelet on
The muscles of the body function by pulling against bones that
rotate about joints. Muscles can only pull, not push, given that the
activation of muscles results in shortening contractions. Howev er,
through the system of bony levers, muscle contractions can be
manifested as either pulling or pushing forces against external
objects.
The body has approximately 206 bones, though the number can
vary. This relatively light, strong structur e provides leverage,
support, and protection to internal organs (figure 1.1). The axial
skeleton  consists of the skull (cranium), vertebr al column (vertebr a
C1 through the coccyx), ribs, and sternum. The appendicular
skeleton  includes the shoulder (or pectoral) girdle (left and right
scapula and clavicle); bones of the arms, wrists, and hands (left and
right humerus, radius, ulna, carpals, metacarpals, and phalanges);
the pelvic girdle (left and right coxal or innominate bones); and the
bones of the legs, ankles, and feet (left and right femur, patella,
tibia, fibula, tarsals, metatarsals, and phalanges).
Junctions of bones are called joints . Fibrous joints  (e.g., sutures
of the skull) allow virtual ly no movement, cartilaginous joints
(e.g., intervertebr al disks) allow limited movement, and synovial
joints  (e.g., elbow and knee) allow consider able movement.
Movements in relation to sports and exercise mainly occur at
synovial joints, whose most important features are low friction and
large range of motion. Articulating bone ends are covered with
smooth hyaline carti lage, and the entire joint is enclosed in a
40
capsule filled with synovial fluid. Additional supporting structur es
of ligament and carti lage usual ly exist (41).
FIGURE 1.1  (a) Front view and  (b) rear view of an adul t male human sk eleton.
41
What Factors Affect Skeletal Growth in an
Adult?
Aside from genetics, dietary habits and physical activity patterns affect the adult
skeleton. Several resear ch studies have supported resistance training as yielding
positive bone adaptations. Hence, consistently lifting heavy loads during job tasks
or via resistance training increases bone density and bone miner al content.
Consistently performing more explosiv e movements with impact facilitates similar
adaptations. Some of the highest bone densities have been observ ed in people
who engage in gymnastics or other activities that involve high-str ength, high-
power , or high-impact movements (29). Since bone adaptations occur less rapidly
compar ed to skeletal muscle, the consistent implementation of progressive
overload is important to f acilitate posi tive adaptations.
Virtual ly all joint movements consist of a rotation about points or
axes. Joints can be categoriz ed by the number of directions about
which rotation can occur. Uniaxial joints , such as the elbow ,
operate as hinges, essential ly rotating about only one axis. The knee
is often referred to as a hinge joint, but its axis of rotation actual ly
changes throughout the joint range of motion. Biaxial joints , such
as the ankle and wrist, allow movement about two perpendicular
axes. Multiaxial joints , including the shoulder and hip ball-and-
socket joints, allow movement about all three perpendicular axes
that define space.
The vertebral column  is made up of vertebr al bones separ ated
by flexible disks that allow movement to occur. The vertebr ae are
grouped into 7 cervical vertebrae in the neck region; 12 thoracic
vertebr ae in the middle to upper back; 5 lumbar vertebrae in the
lower back; 5 sacral vertebr ae, which are fused together and make
up the rear part of the pelvis; and 3 to 5 coccygeal vertebr ae, which
form a kind of vestigial internal tail extending down ward from the
pelvis.
42
Skelet al Musculature
The system of muscles that enables the skeleton to move is depicted
in figure 1.2. The connection point between bones is the joint, and
skeletal muscl es are attached to bones at each of their ends.
Without this arr angement, mo vement could not oc cur.
Musculoskeletal Macrostructure and Microstructure
Each skeletal muscle contains  muscle tissue made up of a variety of
cell types (with the most notable being muscle fibers), connectiv e
tissue, nerves, blood vessels , and a plethor a of cell types between
muscle fibers that serve different functions. Fibrous connectiv e
tissue, or epimysium , covers the body’s more than 430 skeletal
muscles. The epimysium is contiguous with the tendons at the ends
of the muscle  (figure 1.3). The tendon  is attached to bone
periosteum , a special ized connectiv e tissue covering all bones.
Notably , muscl e contractions pull on tendons, and in turn, this moves
bones that are attached to the associated tendons. Limb muscles
have two attachments to bone, including proximal  (closer  to the
trunk) and distal  (farther from the trunk) attachments. The two
attachments of trunk muscles are termed superior  (closer  to the
head) and inferior  (closer to the f eet).
Muscle cells, often called muscle fibers  or myofibers , are long
(sometimes running the entire length of a muscle), cylindrical cells
50 to 100 μm in diameter  (about the diameter of a human hair).
Muscle fibers have all their nuclei situated on the outer periphery of
the cell and have a striated appear ance when viewed with a
microscope under low magni fication. Under the epimysium the
muscle fibers are grouped in bundles (fasciculi ) that may consist of
up to 150 fibers, with the bundles surrounded by connectiv e tissue
called perimysium . Each muscle fiber is surrounded by connectiv e
tissue called endomysium , which is encircled by and is contiguous
with the muscle fiber membrane, or sarcolemma  (41). All the
connectiv e tissue—epim ysium, perim ysium, and endom ysium—is
contiguous with the tendon, so tension developed in a muscle cell is
43
transmi tted to the tendon and the bone to which it is attached
(figure 1.3).
The junction between a motor neuro n (nerve cell) and the
muscle fibers it innerv ates is called the motor end plate, or, more
often, the neuromuscular junction  (figure 1.4). Each muscle cell
has only one neuromuscular junction, although a single motor
neuron innerv ates many muscle fibers, sometimes hundr eds or even
thousands. A motor neuron and the muscle fibers it innerv ates are
called a motor unit. All the muscle fibers of a motor unit contract
together when they ar e stimulated b y the motor neur on.
The interior structur e of a muscle fiber is depicted in figure 1.5.
The sarcoplasm,  which is the cytoplasm of a muscle fiber, is an
aqueous medium through which the exchange of ions (sodium,
potassium, calcium) and metabol ites (ADP, ATP, inorganic
phosphate) occur to and from different organel les. Not only is the
sarcoplasm of critical importance to muscle fibers because of this
role, but intracellular organel les and structur es are also suspended in
the sarcoplasm. These organel les and structur es include the
contractile appar atus constructed of thick and thin protein filaments,
other proteins including metabol ic enzymes and signal ing proteins,
stored glycogen and fat particles, ribosomes that facilitate protein
synthesis, and special ized organel les such as mitochondria and the
sarcoplasmic r eticulum.
44
FIGURE 1.2  (a) Front view and  (b) rear view of adul t male human sk eletal musculatur e.
45
FIGURE 1.3 Schematic drawing of a muscle illustrating three types of connectiv e tissue:
epimysium (the outer layer), perim ysium (surrounding each fasciculus, or group of muscle
fibers), and endom ysium (surr ounding individual muscle fibers).
46
FIGURE 1.4  Motor unit, consisting of a motor neuron and the muscle fibers it
innerv ates. A single motor uni t typical ly contains sev eral hundr ed muscle fibers.
47
FIGURE 1.5  Sectional view of a muscle fiber .
Hundr eds of myofibrils  (each about 1 μm in diameter , 1/100 the
diameter of a hair) exist in the sarcoplasm of one muscle fiber.
Myofibrils are the contractile machinery of muscle fibers, and two
types of myofilaments  are highly enriched in myofibrils, including
myosin  and actin . The thicker myosin filaments (about 16 nm in
diameter , or 1/10,000 the diameter of a hair) contain up to 200
myosin molecu les. A single myosin molecule consists of two myosin
heavy chain proteins and four myosin light chain proteins. This
molecule also contains two head-like features (one being  from each
of the two heavy chains), two hinge points below each head, and
two tail-like features that act to keep the two heavy chain proteins
bound. When examining a thick filament containing hundr eds of
myosin molecules, the globular heads protrude away from the thick
filament at regular interv als, and the head-l ike structur es form
crossbridges  with actin filaments during muscle contraction. The
thin actin filaments (about 6 nm in diameter) consist of two strands
arranged in a double helix. Myosin and actin filaments are organized
longitudinal ly in the smallest contractile unit of skeletal muscle
termed the sarcomere . Sarcomer es average about 2.5 μm in length
in a relaxed fiber (appr oximately 4,500 per centimeter of muscle
48
length) and are repeated through the entire length of myofibrils that
span the muscle fiber (4).
The arrangement of the myosin and actin filaments within
sarcomer e boundaries give muscle fibers a striated dark/l ight
appear ance under magni fication. The dark A-band  corresponds with
the alignment of the myosin filaments, whereas the light I-band
corresponds with the areas in two adjacent sarcomer es that contain
only actin filaments (41). The Z-line  is in the middle of the I-band
and appears as a thin, dark line running longitudinal ly through the I-
band. The H-zone  is the area in the center of the sarcomer e, where
only myosin filaments are present. During muscle contraction, the H-
zone decreases as the actin filaments slide over myosin filaments
toward the center of the sarcomer e. The I-band also decreases as
the Z-lines ar e pulled tow ard the center of the sar comer e.
49
FIGURE 1.6 Gener al view of the myosin and actin filaments in muscle. The arrangemen t
of myosin (thick) and actin (thin) fi laments giv es skeletal muscle i ts striated appear ance.
50
Figure 1.6 shows a simplistic depiction of myosin and actin in the
sarcomer e. Biochemical bonds allow for myosin proteins to
aggregate into the highly organized thick myosin filament, and thick
filaments are anchor ed to special ized proteins in the M-line, which is
in the center of the sarcomere (the center of the H-zone). Actin
filaments are anchor ed to Z-lines through another set of special ized
proteins. Although both M-lines and Z-lines exist in tandem
throughout the entire myofibril, individual sarcomer es are defined as
the thick myosin and thin actin filaments as well as associated
proteins found between two Z-lines. It is also notable that six actin
filaments surround each myosin filament, and each actin filament is
surrounded by three myosin filaments. This lattice-like arrangement
enables a highly organized and efficient structur e for muscular
contraction.
Each myofibril is encased by an intricate system of tubules, called
the sarcoplasmic reticulum  (figure 1.5, page 5), which terminates
as vesicles in the vicinity of the Z-lines. Calcium ions are stored in
the sarcoplasmic reticulum, and muscle activation leads to the
release of these calcium stores to facilitate muscular contraction.
Dischar ge of an action potential  (an electrical nerve impulse)
arrives nearly simultaneously  from the surface to all depths of the
muscle fiber. Calcium is thus released throughout the muscle fiber,
producing a coor dinated contr action of the entir e cell.
51
FIGURE 1.7 Contr action at the sarcomer e level. (a) In stretched muscle the I-bands and
H-zone are elongated and there is low force potential due to a reduction in actin and
myosin overlap and, thus, actin-m yosin cross-bridge formation potential.  (b) When muscle
52
contracts (here partial ly), the I-bands  and H-zone are shortened. In this example, force
potential is highest  due to optimal actin and myosin overlap. (c) With contracted muscle,
force potential is again low because actin and m yosin o verlap is not optimal.
The discharge of an action potential from a motor
neuron signals the release of calcium from the
sarcoplasmic reticulum into the myofibrils of a muscle
fiber, leading to a cascade of events that result in the
contraction of the muscle fiber.
Sliding-Filament Theory of Muscular Contraction
The sliding-filament theory  was proposed by Huxley and Hanson
in 1954 to mechanistical ly explain muscular contraction at the
molecular level (22). In its simplest form, the sliding-filament theory
indicates that actin filaments anchor ed to each end of the sarcomer e
slide inward on myosin filaments. This results in Z-lines being pulled
toward the center of the sarcomer e and in muscle fiber shortening
(figure 1.7). As actin filaments slide over myosin filaments, both the
H-zone and I-band shrink. The energy-dependent association of
myosin heads with actin filaments (i.e., actin-m yosin crossbridge
formation), as well as the energy-dependent inward movement of
actin filaments over the myosin filaments through what is termed the
power stroke , are the bases for muscle contraction. Although a
very small displacement of an actin filament occurs with each power
stroke, this action is rapidly repeated across all sarcomer es during
voluntary muscle contractions  leading to appreciable movement with
prolonged contr actions (41).
Resting Phase
When a muscle is not active, low levels of calcium are present in the
myofibrils of muscle fibers (most of it is stored in the sarcoplasmic
reticulum), so v ery few actin-m yosin cr ossbridges ar e formed.
Excitation–Contraction Coupling Phase
53
When a motor neuron activates a muscle fiber, a cascade  of events
occur that stimulate the sarcoplasmic reticulum to release calcium
ions into the myofibrils of the muscle fiber. Secreted calcium ions
bind with a high affinity to the troponin  protein, which exists at
regular interv als along the actin filament (figure 1.6). This calcium-
troponin interaction causes a shift in another protein termed
tropomyosin , which is bound to troponin and spans the length of
the actin filament. These events expose the myosin binding site on
actin and enable the myosin head to attach to the actin filament to
form an actin- myosin crossbr idge (4). It is important to understand
that the amount of force produced by any given muscle is directly
related to the number of actin-m yosin crossbridges formed within
the muscle fibers of that muscle (4). Thus, activities that require a
high force output necessi tate the activation (or recruitment) of most
motor neurons and the muscle fibers they innerv ate to achieve the
maximal amount of actin-m yosin cr ossbridge f ormation.
The number of actin-myo sin crossbridges formed within
the muscle fibers of a given muscle at any instant in
time dictates the force production of the muscle.
Contraction Phase
The contraction phase involves the mechanical movement (or
pivoting) of the myosin head from the resting phase when  the actin-
myosin crossbridge is formed, which leads to the pulling of the
associated actin filament to the center of the sarcomer e. Critically,
this mechanical movement is catalyz ed from the biochemical energy
provided by the hydrolysis (or breakdown) of adenosine triphosphate
(ATP) by the myosin adenosine triphosphatase  (ATPase)
enzyme present on the myosin head. The products of ATP hydrolysis
include adenosine diphosphate (ADP) and inorganic phosphate (Pi),
metabol ites that also serve critical roles in the contraction process.
While the different phases of the contraction phase are relatively
complex, they can be summariz ed as f ollows:
54
1. The myosin head hydrolyzes ATP into ADP and Pi, both of
which remain bound to the myosin head. The energy provided
by this biochemical reaction results in a conformational change
whereby the m yosin head is cock ed into a high-ener gy state.
2. In its high-ene rgy state, the myosin head binds to actin to
form the actin-m yosin cr ossbridge.
3. The release of Pi from the myosin head catalyz es a
confirmational change in the myosin molecule, leading to the
power stroke, which is the pivoting of the myosin head that
pulls the actin fi lament tow ard the center of the sar comer e.
4. Following the first power stroke, ADP is released from the
myosin head and another ATP molecule binds to the myosin
head.
5. The actin-m yosin crossbridge is subsequently dissociated, the
myosin head returns to its original low-energy state and
conformation, and the process is repeated with the hydrolysis
of the newly bound A TP molecule.
So long as calcium ions remain bound to troponin during muscle
activation, contiguous rapid rounds of actin-m yosin crossbridge
formation, power strokes, and actin-m yosin crossbridge dissociation
will occur, and this is termed crossbridge cycling .
Calcium and ATP are necessary for crossbridge cycling
with actin and myosin filaments.
Relaxation Phase
Relaxation occurs when the stimulation of the motor neuron ceases.
Calcium is pumped back into the sarcoplasmic reticulum through
special ized transporters that also require ATP, and the restoration of
low calcium ion concentr ations in myofibrils highly reduces the
number of actin-m yosin cr ossbridges.
55
Neuromuscular System
Muscle fibers are innerv ated by motor neurons that transmi t
impulses in the form of electrochemical signals from the spinal cord
to the muscle . A motor neuron gener ally has numer ous terminal
branches at the end of its axon, allowing for several muscle fibers to
be innerv ated. This integr ated structur e is termed the motor unit.
Motor units can be gener ally described as slow-twitch, fast-
twitch/fatigue-r esistant, and fast-twitch/fatigable. These motor unit
characteristics dictate muscle fiber type, contractile characteristics,
and in volvement in di fferent types of activi ties and ex ercise.
Activation of Muscles
When a motor neuron fires an impulse or action potent ial, all the
muscle fibers that it innerv ates are simultaneously activated and
contract through the mechan isms previously described. The number
of muscle fibers vary within each motor unit. Muscles that are
required to function with great precision, such as eye muscles, may
have motor units with as few as one muscle fiber. Changes in the
number of active motor units in these small muscles can produce the
extremely fine gradations in force that are necessary for precise
movements of the eyeball. In contrast, the quadriceps muscle group,
which moves the leg with much less precision, may have several
hundr ed muscle fibers innerv ated b y one motor neur on.
An action potential is an electr ochemical signal that travels along
a motor neuron from the cell body to the nerve terminal. Howev er,
this signal is not capable of directly exciting muscle fibers. Instead,
the arrival of the action potential at nerve terminals of the motor
neuron causes the secretion of a neurotransmi tter called
acetylcholine  to each of the neuromusc ular junctions contained
within the motor unit. Secreted acetylchol ine binds to and activates
acetylchol ine receptors present on the sarcolemma of muscle fibers
within the motor unit. Once enough acetylchol ine receptors are
activated, action potentials are gener ated along the sarcolemma of
56
these muscle fibers. These action potentials continue down T-tubules
to eventual ly catalyz e the release of calcium from the sarcoplasmic
reticulum as discussed earlier in this chapter . These events ultimately
lead to all the muscle fibers within the motor unit to simultaneously
contract and develop force. There is no evidence to date suggesting
that an active motor unit only activates a portion of the muscle
fibers to contract. Similarly, no evidence to date suggests that
individual muscle fibers can be partial ly activated within an active
motor unit. Hence, the all-or-none principle  has been gener ally
used to describe this phenomenon; specifically, the activation of any
given motor neuron will lead to the activation and contraction of all
of the muscle fibers i t innerv ates.
Each action potential traveling down a motor neuron results in the
rapid activation of the muscle fibers within the motor unit. The brief
contraction that occurs in response to one action potential is referred
to as a twitch . Although calcium release from the sarcoplasmic
reticulum during a twitch is sufficient to allow for actin-myosin
crossbridging to occur, a brief twitch (which lasts milliseconds) does
not enable a high level of force to be developed given that calcium is
rapidly sequester ed back to the sarcoplasmic reticulum and the
muscle fiber relaxes (figure 1.8a). If a second twitch is elicited from
the motor neuron before the innerv ated muscle fibers completely
relax, forces gener ated from the two twitches summate, resulting in
a greater force relative to that which is produced by a single twitch
(figure 1.8b). Decreasing the time interv al between twitches results
in an even greater force summation, and a high activation frequency
leads to the merging of twitches in what has been termed  unfused
and fused tetanic  contraction s (figure 1.8c and d). The force
gener ated by a motor unit during fused tetanic contractions (i.e., the
maximal tetanic force) is the maximal force that the motor unit can
develop (8). The ability of motor units to sustain this type of
contraction (along with the size of muscle fibers and motor unit
recruitment patterns) is likely one of the key determinants of
maximal f orce and power outputs during athletic endea vors.
57
FIGURE 1.8 Twitch, twitch summation, and tetanus of a motor unit: a = single twitch; b
= force resulting from summation of two twi tches;  c = unf used tetanus;  d = fused tetanus.
Muscle Fiber Types
Skeletal muscles are composed of muscle fibers that have markedly
different morphological and physiological characteristics (37). These
differences have led to different classification systems, with the most
familiar including the terms slow-twitch  and fast-twitch  muscle
fibers. Becaus e a motor unit innerv ates muscle fibers that are
metabol ically and functional ly similar to one another , motor units
have also been historical ly designated using this nomenclatur e. A
fast-twitch motor unit is one that develops force and relaxes rapidly ,
thus exhibi ting a shorter twitch time. Slow-twitch motor units, in
contrast, develop force and relax slowly and have a longer twitch
time. Gener al differences between these types of motor units can be
found in figure 1.9.
Regarding muscle fiber classification, histochemical staining for
myosin ATPase content was also used for years to classify myofibers
as type I (slow-twitch), type IIa (fast-twitch), and type IIx (fast-
twitch). Other methods used for myofiber classification involve single
fiber isolation techniques to quanti fy the presence of different
myosin heavy chain isoforms and immunohistochemical staining for
myosin heavy chain isoforms (33). The nomenclatur e for both
techniques is akin to that associated with the myosin ATPase
histology methods.
58
Fiber types are also delineate d by differences in fatigue resistance
and force production capabi lities, and this can be due to small to
moder ate differences in cellular morphology , intracellular protein
content, and organel le distribution. For instance, type I fibers are
gener ally more fatigue resistant relative to type II fibers, and type I
fibers have a higher capaci ty to produce ATP via aerobic metabol ism.
This difference can be largely attributed to mitochondrial
characteristic differences between fiber types, because type I fibers
have a higher density and a more even distribution of mitochondria
between myofibrils relative to type II fibers (31). Howev er, type I
fibers produce  less overall force and yield a lower rate of force
development compar ed to type II fibers. These latter characteristic
differences are chiefly due to type I myofibers exhibi ting lower
cellular diameters (and thus less myofibrils per cell) compar ed to
type II fibers (21). Additional ly, myosin ATPase reaction rates differ
between the type I and II isoforms, wherein the type I isoform
exhibi ts a relatively lower reaction rate and thus a reduced rate at
which cr ossbridge cy cling can oc cur (38).
59
FIGURE 1.9 Comparison of slow- and fast-twitch motor units: a = schema tic of slow-
twitch and fast-twitch motor units innerv ating separ ate sets of muscle  fibers;  b =
characteristics of slow-twitch and fast-twitch motor units; c = hypoth etical differences
between unweighted versus weighted arm curls on slow-twitch and fast-twitch motor unit
recruitment patterns. Note:  In healthy individua ls this innerv ation pattern (a) exists in a
pseudo-r andom mosaic pattern. Unlike non-weighted contractions that recruit lower
threshold motor units, weighted contractions  (c) will recruit both lower threshold slow-
60
twitch and higher threshold fast-twitch motor units, which is an example of the size
principle of motor uni t recruitment.
Other notable differences exist between type I and II fibers. For
instance, type I fibers have more contacts with capillaries compar ed
to type II fibers (5, 19, 23, 34), and this feature (along with smaller
cellular diameters and more intracellular myoglobin) yields a higher
oxygen diffusion potential that favors aerobic metabol ism. A 2021
resear ch study using sophisticated molecular approache s has also
unveiled that the content of hundr eds of structur al and metabol ic
proteins differs between type I, IIa, and IIx fibers (30), and these
findings suggest that these appreciable differences contribute to the
unique fiber type characteristics discussed in this paragraph. Based
on these differences, it is not surprising that postur al muscles, such
as the soleus, have a high composi tion of type I fibers, whereas
larger locomotor muscles, such as the quadriceps muscl es, have a
mixtur e of both type I and type II fibers to enable both low and high
power output activities (such as jogging and sprinting, respectiv ely).
Refer to table 1.1 for a summar y of the primary characteristics of
fiber t ypes.
Motor units are composed of muscle fibers with specific
morphological and physiological characteristics that
determine their functional capacity.
TABLE 1.1  Major Characteristics of Muscle Fiber
Types
Characteristic Fiber types
Type I Type IIa Type IIx
Motor neur on siz e Small Large Large
Recruitment thr eshold Low Intermediate/high High
Nerve conduction v elocity Slow Fast Fast
61
Characteristic Fiber types
Contr action speed Slow Fast Fast
Relaxation speed Slow Fast Fast
Fatigue r esistance High Intermediate/low Low
Endur ance High Intermediate/low Low
Force production Low Intermediate High
Power output Low Intermediate/high High
Aerobic enzyme content High Intermediate/low Low
Anaer obic enzyme content Low High High
Sarcoplasmic r eticulum complexi ty Low Intermediate/high High
Capillary densi ty High Intermediate Low
Myoglobin content High Low Low
Mitochondrial siz e, densi ty High Intermediate Low
Fiber diameter Small Intermediate Large
Color Red White/red White
Motor Unit Recruitment Patterns
Through everyday experiences, it is evident that a given muscle can
vary its level of force output according to the level required by a
particular task. This ability to vary or gradate force is essential for
performance of smooth, coordinated patterns of movement.
Muscular force can be graded in two ways. One is through variation
in the frequenc y at which motor units are activated. A single twitch
results from one action poten tial, and this does not produce a great
deal of force. Howev er, if the frequency of activation is increased so
that the forces of the twitches begin to overlap or summate, the
resulting force developed by the motor unit is much greater. This
method of varying force output is especial ly importan t in small
muscles, such as those of the hand. Even at low forces, most of the
motor units in these muscles are activated, albeit at a low frequency .
62
Force output of the whole muscle is intensi fied through an increase
in the frequency of firing of individual motor units. Another manner
to increase muscle force involves increasing the number of motor
units activated, a process known as recruitment . In large muscles,
such as those in the thigh, most motor units are required to be
activated at relatively higher frequencies during near-maximal
contraction efforts. As a result, increases in force output are
achiev ed through increases in motor unit firing frequency as well as
the recruitment of addi tional motor uni ts.
TABLE 1.2  Relative Involvement of Muscle Fiber
Types in Sport Events
Event Type I Type II
100 m sprint Low High
800 m run High High
Marathon High Low
Olympic weightl ifting Low High
Soccer, lacrosse, hock ey High High
American f ootbal l wide r eceiver Low High
American f ootbal l lineman Low High
Basketball, team handbal l Low High
Volleybal l Low High
Basebal l or softbal l pitcher Low High
Mixed martial arts High High
Wrestling High High
50 m swim Low High
Field ev ents Low High
Cross-country ski ing, biathlon High Low
Tennis High High
63
Event Type I Type II
Downhi ll or slalom ski ing High High
Speed skating High High
Bobsled Low High
Distance cy cling High Low
Rowing High High
The types of motor units recruited for a given activity are
determined by the physiological demand imposed by that activity
over a given unit of time (table 1.2). For an activity such as slower
long-distance running, slow-twitch motor units are predominantly
engaged in working muscles given that physiological demand is not
relatively high over time and these motor units possess a heightened
endur ance capaci ty and resistance to fatigue. Sprints at the end of a
race that impose a relatively higher physiological demand, howev er,
require the additional activation of fast-twitch motor units. If an
activity requires near-maxim al contractions over very short time
periods, such as those obser ved with the power clean, most of the
motor units in the involved muscle(s) are recruited and the fast-
twitch motor units make more of a significant contribution to the
effort. Electr omyography estimates have indicated that maximal
voluntary contractions with higher intensi ty weightl ifting typical ly
lead to approximately 90% or more activation of available motor
units in the involved muscle(s) (7). Howev er, some caveats must be
consider ed with this estimat ion. First, the activation of the entire
motor neuron pool is probably not possible in untrained people (9,
10, 18). Moreover, although large fast-twitch units may be recruited
if the effort is substantial, it is probably not possible to activate them
at a high enough frequency under most circumstances for maximal
force to be realized. These details aside, it is important to appreciate
that motor unit activation varies regarding different types of physical
activity.
64
The force output of a muscle can be varied through
changes in the frequenc y of activation of individual
motor units as well as a change in the number of
activated motor units.
Proprioception
Proprioceptors  are special ized sensory receptors located within
joints, muscles, and tendons. Because these receptors are sensitive
to pressure and tension, they relay information concerning muscle
dynamics to the conscious and subconscious parts of the central
nervous system. The brain is thus provided with information
concerning kinesthetic sense, or conscious appreciation of the
position of body parts with respect to gravity. Most of this
proprioceptiv e information, howev er, is processed at subconscious
levels so we do not have to dedicate conscious activity toward tasks
such as maintaining postur e or posi tion of body parts.
Proprioceptors are specialized sensory receptors that
provide the central nervous system with information
needed to maintain muscle tone and perform complex
coordinated movements.
Muscle Spindles
Muscle spindles  are proprioceptors that consist of several modified
muscle fibers enclosed in a sheath of connectiv e tissue (figure 1.10).
These modified fibers, called intrafusal fibers, run parallel to the
normal, or extrafusal , fibers. Muscle spindles provide information
concerning muscle length and the rate of change in length. When
the muscle lengthens, spindles are stretched. This deformation
activates the sensory neuron of the spindle, which sends an impulse
to the spinal cord, where it synapses (connects) with motor neurons.
This results in the activation of motor neurons that innervate the
same muscle. Spindles thus indicate the degree to which the muscle
65
must be activated in order to overcome a given resistance. As a load
increases, the muscle is stretched to a greater extent, and
engagement of muscle spindles results in greater activation of the
muscle. Muscles that perform precise movements have many
spindles per unit of mass to help ensur e exact control of their
contractile activity. A simple example of muscle spindle activity is the
knee jerk reflex. Tapping on the tendon of the knee extensor muscle
group below the patella stretches the muscle spindle fibers. This
causes activation of extrafusal muscle fibers in the same muscle. A
knee jerk occurs as these fibers actively shorten. This, in turn,
shortens the intr afusal fibers and causes their dischar ge to cease.
FIGURE 1.10 Muscle spindle. When a muscle is stretched, deformation of the muscle
spindle activates the sensory neuron, which sends an impulse to the spinal cord, where it
synapses wi th a motor neur on, causing the muscle to contr act.
66
How Can Athletes Improve Force
Production?
Incorpor ate phases of training that use heavier loads (or explosiv e actions) to
optimiz e motor uni t recruitment and firing f requency pat terns
Also incorpor ate phases of training that promote skeletal muscular
hypertr ophy given that more myofibrils (and thus more actin-m yosin
crossbridges) wi ll be a vailable f or near -maximal muscle contr actions
Finally, implement training methods that specifically target movements where
increases in force are desired (e.g., heavy bench press and back squat
exercises f or incr easing pushing f orces)
Golgi Tendon Organs
Golgi tendon organs (GTOs)  are proprioc eptors located in
tendons near the myotendinous junction and are in series—that is,
attached end to end, with extrafusal muscle fibers (figure 1.10).
Golgi tendon organs are activated when the tendon attached to an
active muscle is stretched. As tension in the muscle and tendons
increases, the dischar ge of the GTOs increases. The sensory neuron
of the GTO synapses with an inhibi tory interneur on in the spinal
cord, which in turn synapses with and inhibi ts a motor neuron that
serves the same muscle. The result is a reduction in tension within
the muscle and tendon. Thus, whereas spindles facilitate activation
of the muscle, neural input from GTOs inhibi ts muscle activation.
The GTOs’ inhibi tory process is thought to provide a mechanism that
protects against the development of excessiv e tension. The effect of
GTOs is therefore minimal at low forces, but when an extremely
heavy load is placed on the muscle, reflexiv e inhibi tion mediated by
the GTOs causes the muscle to relax. The ability of the motor cortex
to override this inhibi tion may be one of the fundamental
adaptations to hea vy resistance tr aining.
67
Cardiovascular System
The primary roles of the cardiovascular system are to transport
nutrients and remove waste and by-products while assisting with
maintaining the environment for all the body’s functions. The
cardiovascular system plays key roles in the regulation of the body’s
acid–base system, fluids, and temper ature, as well as a variety of
other physiological functions. This section describes the anatom y
and ph ysiology of the heart and the blood v essels.
Heart
The heart is a muscular organ composed of two interconnected but
separ ate pump s; the right side of the heart pumps blood through
the lungs, and the left side pumps blood through the rest of the
body. Each pump has two chambers: an atrium  and a ventricle
(figure 1.11). The right and left atria deliver blood into the right and
left ventricles. The right and left ventricles supply the main force for
moving blood through the pulmonary and peripher al circulations,
respectiv ely (41).
Valves
The tricuspid valve  and mitral valve  (bicuspid valve) (collectively
called atrioventricular [AV] valves ) prevent the flow of blood
from the ventricles back into the atria during ventricular contraction
(systole ). The aortic valve  and pulmonary valve (collectively,
the semilunar valves ) prevent backflow from the aorta and
pulmonary arteries into the ventricles during ventricular relaxation
(diastole ). Each valve opens and closes passiv ely; that is, each
closes when a backw ard pressure gradient pushes blood back
against it, opening when a forward pressure gradient forces blood in
the forward direction (41).
68
Conduction System
A special ized electrical conduction system (figure 1.12) controls the
mechanical contraction of the heart. The conduction system is
composed of
the sinoatrial (SA) node —the intrinsic pacemak er—where
rhythmic electrical impulses ar e normal ly initiated;
the internodal pathways that conduct the impulse from the SA
node to the atrio ventricular node;
the atrioventricular (AV) node , where the impulse is
delayed slightly bef ore passing into the v entricles;
the atrioventricular (AV) bundle , which conducts the
impulse to the v entricles; and
the left bundle branch  and right bundle branch , which
further divide into the Purkinje fibers  and conduct impulses
to all parts of the v entricles.
The SA node is a small area of special ized muscle tissue located in
the upper lateral wall of the right atrium. The fibers of the node are
contiguous with the muscle fibers of the atrium, with the result that
each electrical impulse that begins in the SA node normal ly spreads
immediately into the atria. The conductiv e system is organized so
that the impulse does not travel into the ventricles too rapidly ,
allowing time for the atria to contract and empty blood into the
ventricles before ventricular contraction begins. It is primari ly the AV
node and its associated conductiv e fibers that delay each impulse
entering into the ventricles. The AV node is located in the posterior
septal w all of the right atrium (41).
The left and right bundle branches lead from the AV bundle into
the ventricles. Except for their initial portion, where they penetr ate
the AV barrier , these conduction fibers have functional characteristics
quite opposi te those of the AV nodal fibers. They are large and
transmi t impulses at a much higher velocity than the AV nodal fibers.
Because these fibers give way to the Purkinje fibers, which more
completely penetr ate the ventricles, the impulse travels quickly
69
throughout the entire ventricular system and causes both ventricles
to contr act at appr oximately the same time (41).
The SA node normal ly controls heart rhythmici ty because its
dischar ge rate is consider ably greater (60-80 times per minute) than
that of either the AV node (40-60 times per minute) or the
ventricular fibers (15-40 times per minute). Each time the SA node
dischar ges, its impulse is conducted into the AV node and the
ventricular fibers, dischar ging their excitable membr anes. Thus,
these potential ly self-excitatory tissues are dischar ged before self-
excitation can actual ly occur.
70
FIGURE 1.11 Structur e of the human heart and the course of blood flow through its
chambers.
71
FIGURE 1.12  The electrical conduction system of the heart.
The inherent rhythmici ty and conduction properties of the
myocardium  (heart muscle) are influenced by the cardiovascular
center of the medul la, which transmi ts signals to the heart through
the sympathetic  and parasympathetic nervous  systems , both
of which are components of the autonomic nervous system. The
atria are supplied with a large number of both sympathetic and
parasympathetic neurons, whereas the ventricles receive
sympathetic fibers almost exclusiv ely. Stimulation of the sympathetic
nerves accelerates depolarization of the SA node (the chronotropic
effect), which causes the heart to beat faster. Stimulation of the
parasympathetic nervous system slows the rate of SA node
dischar ge, which slows the heart rate. The resting heart rate
normal ly ranges from 60 to 100 beats/min; fewer than 60 beats/min
is called bradycardia , and more than 100 beats/min is called
tachycardia .
72
Electrocardiogram
The electrical activity of the heart can be recorded at the surface of
the body; a graphic representation of this activity is called an
electrocardiogram (ECG) . A normal ECG, seen in figure 1.13, is
composed of a P-wave , a QRS complex  (the QRS complex is often
three separate waves: a Q-wave, an R-wave, and an S-wave), and a
T-wave . The P-wave and the QRS complex are recordings of
electrical depolarization—that is, the electrical stimulus that leads to
mechanical contraction. Depolarization  is the reversal of the
membr ane electrical potential, whereby the normal ly negativ e
potential inside the membr ane becomes slightly positive and the
outside becom es slightly negativ e. The P-wave is gener ated by the
changes in the electrical potential of cardiac muscle cells that
depolariz e the atria and result in atrial contraction. The QRS complex
is generated by the electrical potential that depolariz es the ventricles
and results in ventricular contraction. In contrast, the T-wave is
caused by the electrical potential gener ated as the ventricles recover
from the state of depolarization; this process, called
repolarization , occurs in ventricular muscle shortly after
depolarization. Although atrial repolarization occurs as well, its wave
formation usually occurs during the time of ventricular depolarization
and is thus mask ed by the QRS complex (41).
73
FIGURE 1.13  Normal electr ocardiogram.
Blood Vessels
The central and peripher al circulation form a single closed-cir cuit
system with two components: an arterial system , which carries
blood away from the heart, and a venous system , which returns
blood toward the heart (figure 1.14). The blood vessels of each
system ar e identi fied her e.
74
FIGURE 1.14 The arterial (right) and venous (left) components of the circulatory system.
The percent values indicate the distribution of blood volume throughout the circulatory
system at r est.
Arteries
The function of arteries  is to rapidly transport blood pumped from
the heart. Because blood pumped from the heart is under relatively
high pressure, arteries have strong, muscular walls. Small branches
of arteries called arterioles  act as control vessels through which
blood enters the capillaries. Arterioles play a major role in the
regulation of blood flow to the capillaries. Arterioles have strong,
muscular walls that are capable of closing the arteriole completely or
allowing it to be dilated many times their size, thus vastly altering
blood flow to the capillaries in response to the needs of the tissues
(41).
75
Capillaries
The function of capillaries  is to facilitate exchange of oxygen, fluid,
nutrients, electr olytes, hormones, and other substances between the
blood and the intersti tial fluid in the various tissues of the body. The
capillary walls are very thin and are permeable to these, but not all,
substances (41).
Veins
Venules  collect blood from the capillaries and gradual ly converge
into the progressively larger veins , which transport blood back to
the heart. Because the pressure in the venous system is very low,
venous walls are thin, although muscular . This allows them to
constrict or dilate to a great degree and thereby act as a reserv oir
for blood, either in small or in large amounts (41). In addition, some
veins, such as those in the legs, contain one-way valves that help
maintain v enous r eturn b y preventing r etrograde blood flow .
What Is the Skelet al Muscle Pump?
The skeletal muscle pump is the assista nce that contracting muscles provide to the
circulatory system. The muscle pump works with the venous system, which
contains the one-way valves for blood return to the heart. The contracting muscle
compr esses the veins, but since the blood can flow only in the direction of the
valves, it is returned to the heart. This mechanism is one of the reasons why it is
important to periodical ly contract leg muscles or to take walking breaks during
prolonged sitting. These activities act to prevent blood pooling in the legs and
facilitate v enous blood r eturn to the heart.
The cardiova scular system transports nutrients and
removes waste products while helping to maintai n the
environment for all the body’s functions. The blood
transports oxygen from the lungs to the tissues for use
in cellular metabolism. Blood also transports carbon
dioxide (mainly as bicarbonate ions) from the
76
metabolically active tissues to the lungs, where it is
removed from the body.
Blood
Two paramount functions of blood are the transport of oxygen from
the lungs to the tissues for use in cellular metabol ism and the
removal of carbon dioxide, the most abundant by-product of
metabol ism, from the tissues to the lungs. The transport of oxygen
is accomplished by hemoglobin , the iron–pr otein molecule carried
by the red blood cells. Hemoglobin also has an additional important
role as an acid–base buffer, a regulator of hydrogen ion
concentr ation, which is crucial to the rates of chemical reactions in
cells. Red blood cells, the major component of blood, have other
functions as well. For instance, they contain a large quanti ty of
carbonic anhydrase, which catalyz es the reaction betwe en carbon
dioxide and w ater to f acilitate carbon dio xide r emoval.
77
Respiratory System
The primary function of the respiratory system is the basic exchange
of oxygen and carbon dioxide. The anatom y of the human
respiratory system is shown in figure 1.15. As air passes  through the
nose, the nasal cavities perform three distinct functions: warming,
humidi fying, and purifying the air (41). Air is distributed to the lungs
by way of the trachea, bronchi, and bronchioles. The trachea  is
called the first-gener ation respiratory passage , and the right and left
main bronchi  are the second-gener ation passages; each division
thereafter is an additional gener ation (bronchioles ). There are
approximately 23 gener ations before the air finally reaches the
alveoli , wher e gases ar e exchanged in r espiration (41).
The primary function of the respiratory system is the
basic exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide.
Exchange of Air
The amount and movement of air and expired gases in and out of
the lungs are controlled by expansion and recoil of the lungs. The
lungs do not actively expand and recoil themselv es but rather are
acted on to do so in two ways: by down ward and upward movement
of the diaphr agm to lengthe n and shorten the chest cavity and by
elevation and depression of the ribs to increase and decrease the
back-to-front diameter of the chest cavity (41). Normal, quiet
breathing is accompl ished almost entirely by movement of the
diaphr agm. During inspir ation, contraction of the diaphr agm creates
a negative pressure (vacuum ) in the chest cavity, and air is drawn
into the lungs. During expiration, the diaphr agm simply relaxes; the
elastic recoil of the lungs, chest wall, and abdominal structur es
compr esses the lungs, and air is expelled. During heavy breathing,
the elastic forces alone are not powerf ul enough to provide the
necessary respiratory response. The extra required force is achiev ed
78
mainly by contraction of the abdominal muscles, which push the
abdomen upw ard against the bot tom of the diaphr agm (41).
The second method for expanding the lungs is to raise the rib
cage. Because  the chest cavity is small and the ribs are slanted
down ward while in the resting position, elevating the rib cage allows
the ribs to project almost directly forward so that the sternum can
move forward and away from the spine. The muscles that elevate
the rib cage are called muscles of inspir ation and include the
external intercostals, the sternocleidomastoids, the anterior serrati,
and the scaleni. The muscles  that depress the chest are muscles of
expiration and include the abdominal muscles (rectus abdominis,
external and internal obliques, and transversus abdominis) and the
internal inter costals (41).
79
FIGURE 1.15  Gross anatom y of the human r espiratory system.
How Important Is It to Train the Muscles
of Respiration?
Regular exercise in gener al is beneficial for maintaining respiratory muscle
function. Both endur ance exercise, which involves repetitive contraction of
breathing muscles, and resistance exercise, which taxes the diaphr agm and
abdominal muscles  especial ly because of their use for stabilization and for
increasing intra-abdominal pressure (Valsalv a maneuv er), can result in some
muscle training adaptations. This can help to preserv e some of the pulmonary
function wi th aging.
80
Pleural press ure is the pressure in the narrow space between
the lung pleura and the chest wall pleura  (memb ranes enveloping
the lungs and lining the chest walls). This pressure is normal ly
slightly negativ e. Because the lung is an elastic structur e, during
normal inspir ation the expan sion of the chest cage can pull on the
surface of the lungs and create a more negativ e pressure, thus
enhancing inspir ation. During expiration, the events are essential ly
reversed (41).
Alveolar pressure is the pressure inside the alveoli when the
glottis is open, and no air is flowing into or out of the lungs. In fact,
in this instance the pressure in all parts of the respiratory tree is the
same all the way to the alveoli and is equal to the atmospheric
pressure. To cause inward flow of air during inspir ation, the pressure
in the alveoli must fall to a value slightly below atmospheric
pressure. During expiration, alveolar pressure must rise above
atmospheric pr essure (41).
During normal respiration at rest, only 3% to 5% of the total
energy expended by the body is required for pulmonary ventilation.
During very heavy exercise, however, the amount of energy required
can increase to as much as 8% to 15% of total body energy
expendi ture, especial ly if the person has any degree of increased
airway resistance, as occurs with exercise-induced asthma.
Precautions, including physician evaluation of the athlete, are often
recommended, depending on the potential lev el of impairment.
Exchange of Respiratory Gases
With ventilation, oxygen diffuses from the alveoli into the pulmonary
blood, and carbon dioxide diffuses from the blood into the alveoli.
The process of diffusion  is a simple random motion of molecules
moving in opposi te directions through the alveolar capillary
membr ane. The energy for diffusion is provided by the kinetic
motion of the molecules themselves. Net diffusion of the gas occurs
from the region of high concentr ation to the region of low
concentr ation. The rates of diffusion of the two gases depend on
81
their concentr ations in the capillaries and alveoli and the partial
pressure of each gas (41).
At rest, the partial pressure of oxygen in the alveoli is about 60
mmHg greater than that in the pulmonary capillaries. Thus, oxygen
diffuses into the pulmonary capillary blood. Similarly, carbon dioxide
diffuses in the opposi te direction. This process of gas exchange is so
rapid as to be thought of as instantaneous (41).
82
Acute Responses to Aerobic Exercise
A single bout of aerobic exercise places a significant metabol ic
demand on the body, especial ly the cardiovascular , respiratory, and
muscular systems. Repeated exposur e to the acute stress of exercise
that occurs with chronic exercise training results in many changes in
the function and responses of all body systems. A basic knowledge
of the acute effects of aerobic exercise provides the foundation for
an understand ing of the chronic adaptations that are discussed in
chapter 6 .
Cardiovascular Responses
The primary functions of the cardiovascular system during aerobic
exercise are to deliver oxygen and other nutrients to the working
muscles and remove metabol ites and waste products. This section
describes the car diovascular mechanisms of these acute r esponses.
Cardiac Output
Cardiac output  is the amoun t of blood pumped by the heart in
liters per minute and is determined by the quanti ty of blood ejected
with each beat (stroke volume ) and the heart’s rate of pumping
(heart rate ):
Q̇ = Stroke volume  × Heart rate (1.1)
where Q̇ is the cardiac output. Stroke volume is measur ed in
milliliters of blood per beat, and heart rate is measur ed in beats
(contr actions) per minute (17).
In the progression from rest to steady -state aerobic exercise,
cardiac output initially increases rapidly , then more gradual ly, and
subsequently reaches a plateau. With maximal exercise, cardiac
output may increase to four times the resting level of about 5 L/min
to a maximum of 20 to 22 L/min (1). Stroke volume begins to
increase at the onset of exercise and continues to rise until the
individual’ s oxygen consumpt ion is at approximately 40% to 50% of
83
maximal oxygen uptak e (1). At that point, stroke volume begins to
plateau. Sedentary college-aged men have maximal stroke volumes
averaging between 100 and 120 mL of blood per beat; maximal
stroke volumes for college-aged women are approximately 25% less,
due to a smaller average body size as well as a smaller heart muscle
(32). The effect of training on the responses to exercise is marked,
and we see an increase in maximal stroke volume for college-aged
men up to 150 to 160 mL per beat and approximately 100 to 110 for
college-aged women (32).
Stroke Volume
Two physiological mechanisms are responsible for the regulation of
stroke volume. The first is a result of the end-diastolic volume ,
the volume of blood available to be pumped by the left ventricle at
the end of the filling phase, or diastole. The second is due to the
action of catecholamines, including epinephrine and norepinephrine,
which are hormones of the sympathetic nervous system that
produce a more forceful ventricular contraction and greater systol ic
emptying of the heart.
At the onset of exercise, or even with the anticipation of exercise,
sympathetic stimulation increases myocardial contractility and
consequently increases stroke volume (14, 27). With prolonged
aerobic exercise, the amount of blood returning to the heart (also
called venous return ) is increased  due to a combination of
venoconstriction (induced via increased sympathetic nervous system
activation) (2), the skeletal muscle pump (muscular contractions
combine with one-way venous valves to “push” more blood to the
heart during exercise (16), and the respiratory pump (increased
respiratory frequency and tidal volume) (28). These responses result
in pressure alterations on the chambers of the heart and thoracic
vena cava, which promote increased venous return (28), and thus
end-diastol ic volume is significantly increased. With the increased
volume, the myocardial fibers become more stretched than at rest,
resulting in a more forceful contraction, an increase in force of
84
systol ic ejection, and greater cardiac emptying (17). This principle,
called the Frank-Starling mechanism , is related to the concept
that the force of contraction is a function of the length of the fibers
of the muscle wall. This increase in cardiac emptying is characteriz ed
by an increase in the ejection fraction , or the fraction of the end-
diastol ic volume ejected f rom the heart (14 , 17).
Heart Rate
Just before and at the begin ning of an exercise session, a reflex or
anticipatory stimulation of the sympathetic nervous system results in
an increase in heart rate. Heart rate increases linearly with increases
in intensi ty during aerobic exercise (14). The rate of increase in
heart rate, the actual heart rate response, and the maximal heart
rate achiev ed relate to a variety of individual characteris tics of the
human system, including fitness and age, in addition to exercise
workload.
How Can Athletes Estimate Maximal Heart
Rate?
A simple estimate of maximal heart rate is to subtract one’s age from 220; for
example, the estimated maximal heart r ate for a 47- year-old person is
220 – 47 (age in y ears) = 173 beats/min.
The variance, or standar d deviation, around this estimate is ±10 to 12 beats/min;
thus the actual maximal heart rate for this individual could be expected to fall
within the range of 161 to 185 beats/min. A meta- analysis determined that the
equation 208 – 0.7 × age could be used in healthy adults to more accurately
predict maximal heart r ate (40).
Oxygen Up take
Oxygen uptake  is the amount of oxygen consumed by the body’s
tissues. The oxygen demand of working muscles increases during an
acute bout of aerobic exercise and is directly related to the mass of
exercising muscle, metabol ic efficiency , and exercise intensi ty.
Aerobic exercise involving larger muscles is likely to be associated
85
with a higher total oxygen uptak e. Increased metabol ic efficiency
allows for an increase in oxygen uptak e, especial ly at maximal
exercise.
Maximal oxygen uptake  is the greatest amount of oxygen that
can be used at the cellular level for the entire body. Maximal oxygen
uptak e has been found to correlate well with the degree of aerobic
condi tioning and is recogniz ed as the most widely accepte d measur e
of cardiorespiratory fitness (14). The capaci ty to use oxygen is
largely related to the ability of the heart and circulatory system to
transport oxygen. Howev er, muscular characteristics such as muscle
fiber type, muscle fiber mitochondrial density, and capillary density in
muscle tissue also affect maximal oxygen uptak e. Resting oxygen
uptak e is estimated at 3.5 mL of oxygen per kilogram of body weight
per minute (mL · kg−1 · min−1) for an average person; this value is
defined as 1 metabolic equivalent (MET) . Maximal oxygen
uptak e values in normal, healthy individuals gener ally range from 25
to 80 mL · kg−1 · min−1, or 7.1 to 22.9 METs, and depend on a
variety of physiological parameters, including age and conditioning
level (17).
Oxygen uptak e (V̇O2) can be calculated with the Fick equation ,
which expresses the relationship of cardiac output, oxygen uptak e,
and arterio venous o xygen di fference:
V̇O2 = Q̇ × a-vO2 difference    (1.2)
where Q̇ is the cardiac output in milliliters per minute and a-vO2
difference is the arteriovenous oxygen difference  (the difference
in the oxygen content between arterial and venous blood) in
milliliters of oxygen per 100 mL of blood. Recalling equation 1.1, we
can calculate o xygen uptak e as shown in the f ollowing example:
V̇O2 = Heart rate × Stroke volume × a- vO2 difference
V̇O2 = 72 beats/min × 65 mL blood/beat × 6 mL O 2/100 mL blood = 281
mL O 2/min
To express oxygen uptak e in its common unit (i.e., mL · kg−1 ·
min−1), we would then divide the result by the person’ s weight in
86
kilograms. This is an example for an 80 kilogram (176 pound)
athlete:
V̇O2 = 281 mL O 2/min ÷ 80 kg
V̇O2 = 3.5 mL · kg−1 · min−1
Blood Pressure
Systolic blood pressure  estima tes the pressure exerted against
the arterial walls as blood is forcefully ejected during ventricular
contraction (systole) and, when combined with heart rate, can be
used to describe the myocardial oxygen consumption (work) of the
heart. This estimate of the work of the heart is obtained according
to the following equation and is referred to as the rate–pressure
product , or double product :
Rate–pressure product =     Heart rate × Systolic blood pressure    (1.3)
Diastolic blood pressure  is used to estimate the pressure
exerted against the arterial walls when no blood is being forcefully
ejected through the vessels (diastole). Diastol ic blood  pressure
provides an indication of peripheral resistance and can decrease with
aerobic exercise due to vasodilation. In systemic circulation, pressure
is highe st in the aorta and arteries and rapidly falls off within the
venous circulation. Also, because pumping by the heart is pulsati le,
resting arterial pressure on average fluctuates between a systol ic
level of 120 mmHg and a diastolic level of 80 mmHg (approximate
values). As the blood flow continues through the systemic
circulation, its pressure falls progressively to nearly 0 mmHg (venous
pressure) by the time it reaches the termination of the vena cava in
the right atrium (17).
The mean arterial pressure  is the average blood pressure
throughout the cardiac cycle (equation 1.4). Mean arterial pressure
is not the average of systol ic and diastol ic pressures, because the
arterial pressure usually remains nearer the diastol ic level than the
systol ic level during a greater portion of the cardiac cycle. Thus, the
87
mean arterial pressure is usually less than the average of the systol ic
and diastol ic pressures.
Mean arterial blood pressure = [(Systolic blood pressure − Diastolic blood
pressure) ÷ 3] + Diastolic blood pressure    (1.4)
Normal resting  blood pressure gener ally ranges from 110 to 139
mmHg systol ic and from 60 to 89 mmHg diastol ic. With maximal
aerobic exercise, systol ic pressure can normal ly rise to as much as
220 to 260 mmHg, while diastol ic pressure remains at the resting
level or decr eases sl ightly (17 , 27).
Control of Local Circulation
Resistance to blood flow is also increased with increasing viscosi ty of
the blood and the length of the vessel. Howev er, these factors
remain relatively constant under most circumstances. Thus,
vasoconstriction  (reduction in vessel diameter) and vasodilation
(increase in vessel diameter) are the primary mechanisms for
regulating r egional blood flow .
During aerobic exercise, blood flow to active muscles is
consider ably increased by the dilation of local arterioles; at the same
time, blood flow to other organ systems is reduced by constriction of
the arterioles. A t rest, 15% to 20% of car diac output is distributed to
skeletal muscle, whereas with vigorous exercise this value may rise
to 90% of car diac output (14 , 27).
Acute aerobic exercise results in increased cardiac
output, stroke volume, heart rate, oxygen uptake,
systolic blood pressure, and blood flow to active muscles
and a decrease in diastolic blood pressure.
Respiratory Responses
Aerobic exercise provides for the greatest impact on both oxygen
uptak e and carbon dioxide production as compar ed to other types of
exercise, such as anaer obic resistance training. Significant increases
88
in oxygen delivered to the tissue, carbon dioxide returned to the
lungs, and minute venti lation  (the volume of air breathe d per
minute) provide for appropriate levels of alveolar gas concentr ations
during aer obic ex ercise (27).
With aerobic exercise, increased minute ventilation occurs as a
result of increases in the depth of breathing, frequency of breathing,
or both. During strenuous exercise, the breathing frequency of
healthy young adults usually increases from 12 to 15 breaths per
minute at rest to 35 to 45 breaths per minute, while tidal volume
(TV), the amount of air inhaled and exhaled with each breath,
increases from resting values of 0.4 to 1 L to as much as 3 L or
greater. Conse quently , the minute ventilation can increase to 15 to
25 times the resting value, or to values of 90 to 150 L of air per
minute (14 , 17, 27).
During low- to moder ate-intensi ty aerobic exercise, there is an
increase in ventilation directly associated with both increased oxygen
uptak e and carbon dioxide production. In this instance, the increase
in ventilation is primari ly due to increased tidal volume. The ratio of
minute ventilation to oxygen uptak e is termed the ventilatory
equivalent  and ranges between 20 and 25 L of air per L of oxygen
consumed. In more intense exercise (gener ally above 45% to 65%
of maximal oxygen uptak e in untrained individuals and 70% to 90%
in trained athletes), breathing frequency takes on a greater role. At
these levels, minute ventilation rises disproportionate ly to the
increases in oxygen uptak e and begins to parallel the abrupt rise in
blood lactate. At this point, the ventilatory equiv alent may increase
to 35 or 40 L of air per L of oxygen consumed with this high-
intensi ty activi ty (14, 27).
With inspiration, air enters the alveoli, the functional unit of the
pulmonary system where gas exchange occurs. However, with
inspir ation, air also occupies areas of the respiratory passages: the
nose, mouth, trachea, bronchi, and bronchioles. This area is not
functional for gas exchange and is called the anatomical dead
space . The normal volume of this air space is approximately 150 mL
89
in young adults and increases with age. Because the respiratory
passages stretch with deep breathing, the anatomical dead space
increases as tidal volume increases (figure 1.16). Nevertheless, the
increase in tidal volume with deep breathing is proportionately
greater than any increase in anatomical dead space. Thus,
increasing tidal volume (deeper breathing) provides for more
efficient ventilation than increasing frequency of breathing alone (17,
27).
Physiological dead space  refers to alveoli in which poor blood
flow, poor ventilation, or other problems with the alveolar surface
impair gas exchange. The physiological dead space in the lungs of
healthy people is usually negligible because all or nearly all alveoli
are functional. Certain types of lung disease such as chronic
obstructiv e lung disease or pneumonia can significantly reduce
alveolar functio n, increasing physiological dead space by as much as
10 times the v olume of anatomical dead space (17 , 27).
During aerobic exercise, large amounts of oxygen
diffuse from the capillaries into the tissues; increased
levels of carbon dioxide move from the blood into the
alveoli; and minute ventilation increases to maintain
appropriate alveolar concentrations of these gases.
90
FIGURE 1.16 Distribution of tidal volume in a healthy athlete at rest. The tidal volume
comprises about 350 mL of room air that mixes with alveolar air, about 150 mL of air in the
larger passages (anatomical dead space), and a small portion of air distrib uted to either
poorly v entilated or incompletely fi lled alv eoli (physiological dead space).
Gas Responses
Diffusion is the movement of oxygen and carbon dioxide across a
cell membrane and is a function of the concentr ation of each gas
and the resulting partial pressure exerted by the molecular motion of
each gas. Diffusion results from the movement of gas from high
concentr ation to low concentr ation. At the tissue level, where oxygen
is used in metabolism and carbon dioxide is produced, the partial
pressures of these gases in some instances differ consider ably from
those in arterial blood (figure 1.17). At rest, the partial pressure of
oxygen in the intersti tial fluid (fluid between muscle fibers) rapidly
drops from 100 mmHg in arterial blood to as low as 40 mmHg, while
the partial pressure of carbon dioxide is elevated above that of
arterial blood to about 46 mmHg. During high-intensi ty aerobic
exercise, the partial pressures of these gases are approximately 3
mmHg for oxygen and 90 mmHg for carbon dioxide. Consequently ,
91
these pressure gradients cause the movement of gases across cell
membr anes. In addition, the diffusing capaci ties of oxygen and, in
particular , carbon dioxide increase dramatical ly with exercise, which
facilitates their ex change (14 , 17, 27).
FIGURE 1.17 Pressure gradient s for gas transfer in the body at rest. The pressures of
oxygen (PO2) and carbon dioxide (PCO 2) in alveolar air, venous and arterial blood, and
muscle tissue ar e shown.
Blood Transport of Gases and Metabolic
By-Products
Oxygen is carried in blood  either dissolv ed in the plasma or
combined with hemoglobin. Because oxygen is not readily soluble in
fluids, only about 3 mL of oxygen can be carried per liter of plasma.
92
Nonetheless, this limited amount of oxygen transported in plasma
contributes to the partial pressure of oxygen in blood and other body
fluids, thus playing a role in the mechanisms that regulate  breathing
and in the diffusion of oxygen into alveolar blood and the cells of
body tissues (17 , 27).
Given the limited capaci ty of plasma to carry oxygen, the majori ty
of oxygen in blood is carried by the hemoglobin. Men have about 15
to 16 g of hemoglobin per 100 mL of blood, and women have about
14 g of hemoglobin per 100 mL of blood. One gram of hemoglobin
can carry 1.34 mL of oxygen; thus, the oxygen-carrying capaci ty of
100 mL of blood is about 20 mL of oxygen in men and a little less in
women (27).
The way in which carbon dioxide is removed from the system has
some similarities to oxygen transport, but the vast amount of carbon
dioxide is removed by a more complex process. After carbon dioxide
is formed in the cell, it easily diffuses across the cell membr anes and
is subsequently transported to the lungs. As with oxygen, only a
limited quanti ty of carbon dioxide— about 5% of that produced
during metabol ism—is carried in the plasma; similar to the situation
with oxygen, this limited amount of carbon dioxide contributes to
establ ishing the partial pressure of carbon dioxide in the blood.
Some carbon dioxide is also transported via hemoglobi n, but this
amount is l imited (27).
The greatest amount of carbon dioxide removal (appr oximately
70%) is f rom the combination wi th water and del ivery to the lungs in
the form of bicarbonate (HCO 3−). The initial step in this reversible
reaction is the combination of carbon dioxide in solution with water
in the red blood cells to form carbonic acid. The reaction would
normal ly be quite slow except for the impact of the enzyme carbonic
anhydrase, which significantly speeds up this process. Once carbonic
acid is formed, it is broken down to hydrogen ions and bicarbonate
ions. Because hemoglobin is a significant acid–base buffer, hydrogen
ions combine with hemoglob in. This process helps to maintain the
pH of the blood. Bicarbonate  ions diffuse from the red blood cells to
93
the plasma, while chloride ions diffuse into the blood cells to replace
them (17 , 27).
94
Cardiovascular and Respiratory
Responses to Anaerobic Exercise
Acute bouts of anaer obic exercise and long-term anaer obic training
both have a significant impact on cardiovascular and respiratory
function. This is reflected in both anaer obic athletes  (12) and
sedentary individuals (22), where enhanced cardiac function and
dimensions are appar ent. Heavy-load resistance training, resistance
training with more repetitions of light loads and less rest, and
conventional aerobic endur ance training are all beneficial to the
cardiovascular system but in different ways (13). Improved ability of
the heart, lungs, and circulatory system to function under condi tions
of high pressure and force production can prepare the athlete’ s body
for the extr eme demands of sporting competi tion.
Acute Cardiovascular Responses to
Anaerobic Exercise
An acute bout of anaer obic exercise significantly increases
cardiovascular responses. Heart rate, stroke volume, cardiac output,
and blood pressure all increase significantly during resistance
exercise. Peak blood pressures of 320/250 mmHg and a heart rate of
170 beats/min have been reported during a high-intensi ty (i.e., 95%
of 1RM) leg press exercise (26). Gener ally, the blood pressure
response increases nonlinearly with the magni tude of active muscle
mass and is higher during the concentric phase of each repetition
than during the eccentric phase, especial ly at the “sticking point” of
an exercise. Although large elevations in blood pressure have been
reported during exercise bouts themselv es, there are limited data to
indicate that resistance training has any negativ e effects on resting
blood pressure (6). In addition, intrathoracic pressure increases, and
plasma volume  reductions of up to 22% have been reported (34,
36).
95
Acute anaero bic exercise  results in increased cardiac
output, stroke volume, heart rate, oxygen uptake,
systolic blood pressure, and blood flow to active
muscles.
During a set of resistance exercise, stroke volume and cardiac
output increase mostly during the eccentric phase of each repetition,
especial ly when the Valsalv a technique is used (see chapter 2) (11).
Because the concentric phase of a repetition is much more difficult
and elevations in intrathoracic and intra-abdominal pressures are
more prominent (via the Valsalv a maneuv er), limiting venous return
and reducing end-diastol ic volume, the hemodynamic response of
resistance exercise is delayed such that cardiac output increases
more during rest periods between sets. This is especial ly true for an
individual’ s heart rate response; during the first 5 seconds after
completion of a set, heart rate is higher than during the set itself
(35).
The degree to which blood flow is increased in the working
muscles during anaer obic training is dependent on several factors,
including the intensi ty of resistance, the length of time of the effort
(i.e., the number of repetitions performed), and the size of the
muscle mass activated. When lower resistances are lifted for several
repetitions, the responses are relatively similar to those observ ed
during aerobic exercise (15). Howev er, heavy resistance exercise
transiently decreases blood flow to the working muscles because of
contracted muscle tissue impinging on capillaries and creating a
localized occlusion. Muscula r contractions greater than 20% of
maximal voluntary contraction impede peripher al blood flow within
the muscle during a set, but blood flow increases during the
subsequent rest period (reactive hype remia ) (25). Interestingly,
the lack of blood flow (and subsequent increase in metab olites such
as hydrogen ions and reducti on in pH) during heavy external loading
is a potent stimulus for muscle growth (39). Overall, the magni tude
of the acute cardiovascular responses depends on the intensi ty and
96
volume of exercise, muscle mass involvement, rest period length,
and contr action v elocity (24, 35).
Ventilatory Response to Anaerobic
Exercise
Ventilation rate gener ally does not limit resistance exercise and is
either unaffected or only moder ately improved by anaer obic training.
With resistance  exercise, ventilation is significantly elevated during
each set, but the elevation is even greater during the first minute of
recovery (35). Ventilation rates of more than 60 L/min have been
reported (35), and the rest interv al length had a large effect such
that short rest interv als (30 s to 1 min) produced the most
substantial elevation. Training adaptations include increased tidal
volume and breathing frequency with maximal exercise. With
submaximal activity, howev er, breathing frequency is often reduced
while tidal volume is increased. It appears that such ventilatory
adaptations result from local, neural, or chemical adaptations in the
specific muscle s trained through exercise (3). Additional ly, improved
ventilation efficiency , as characteriz ed by reduced ventilatory
equiv alent for oxygen (the ratio of air ventilated to oxygen used by
the tissues, V̇E/V̇O2), is observ ed in trained versus untrained
individuals (3).
97
Conclusion
Knowledge of musculosk eletal, neuromuscular , cardiovascular , and
respiratory anatom y and physiology is important for the strength and
condi tioning professional to better understand the scienti fic basis for
condi tioning. This includes knowledge of the function of the
macrostructur e and microstructur e of the skeleton and muscle fibers,
muscle fiber types, and interactions between tendon and muscle and
between the motor unit and its activation, as well as the interactions
of the heart, vascular system, lungs, and respiratory system. This
information is necessary for developing training strategies that will
meet the speci fic needs of the athlete.
KEY TERMS
A-band
acetylchol ine
actin
action potential
all-or-none principle
alveolar pr essure
alveoli
anatomical dead space
aortic v alve
appendicular sk eleton
arterial system
arteriole
artery
arterio venous o xygen di fference
atrioventricular (A V) bundle
atrioventricular (A V) node
atrioventricular (A V) valves
atrium
axial sk eleton
98
biaxial joints
bone periosteum
bradycardia
bronchi
bronchiole
capillary
cardiac output
cartilaginous joints
crossbridge
crossbridge cy cling
depolarization
diastole
diastol ic blood pr essure
diffusion
distal
double pr oduct
ejection f raction
electr ocardiogram (ECG)
end-diastol ic volume
endom ysium
epimysium
extrafusal fibers
fascicul i
fast-twitch fiber
fibrous joints
Fick equation
Frank-Starling mechanism
fused tetanic contr action
Golgi tendon or gan (GT O)
heart r ate
hemoglobin
hyaline carti lage
H-zone
I-band
99
inferior
intrafusal fibers
left bundle br anch
maximal heart r ate
maximal o xygen uptak e
mean arterial pr essure
metabol ic equiv alent (MET )
minute v entilation
mitral valve
motor neur on
motor uni t
multiaxial joints
muscle fiber
muscle spindle
myocardium
myofiber
myofibril
myofilament
myosin
myosin adenosine triphosphatase
neuromuscular junction
oxygen uptak e
parasympathetic nerv ous system
perim ysium
physiological dead space
pleura
pleural pressure
power str oke
proprioceptor
proximal
pulmonary v alve
Purkinje fibers
P-wave
QRS complex
100
rate–pr essure product
reactiv e hyperemia
red blood cel l
repolarization
right bundle br anch
sarcolemma
sarcomer e
sarcoplasm
sarcoplasmic r eticulum
semilunar v alves
sinoatrial (S A) node
sliding-fi lament theory
slow-twitch fiber
stroke volume
superior
sympathetic nerv ous system
synovial fluid
synovial joints
systole
systol ic blood pr essure
tachycardia
tendon
tidal v olume
trachea
tricuspid v alve
tropom yosin
troponin
T-wave
twitch
type I fiber
type II a fiber
type IIx fiber
unfused tetanic contr action
uniaxial joints
101
vasoconstriction
vasodilation
vein
venous r eturn
venous system
ventilatory equiv alent
ventricle
venule
vertebr al column
Z-line
STUDY QUESTIONS
  1.  B ased on the sliding-fi lament theory , which of the following
two substance s are needed inside of muscle fibers for muscle
contraction to oc cur?
  a.  sodium and f atty acids
  b.  calcium and A TP
  c.  ADP and P i
  d.  calcium and ir on
  2.  Which of the following is an accurate description of a motor
unit?
  a.  a muscle fiber and al l of the motor neur ons innerv ating i t
  b.  an upper and lower motor neur on
  c.  a motor neur on and al l of the muscle fibers i t innerv ates
  d.  a muscle fiber and al l of the m yofibrils within it
  3.  Maximal oxygen uptak e is most influenced by which of the
following?
  a.  the per centage of t ype I v ersus t ype II fibers in an
individual’ s leg muscles
  b.  total blood v olume
  c.  age-pr edicted maximal heart r ate
  d.  the abi lity of the heart and cir culatory system to tr ansport
oxygen
102
  4.  Which of the following respiratory responses occur during an
aerobic tr aining bout?
  a.  decr eased tidal v olume
  b.  decr eased ph ysiological dead space
  c.  incr eased minute v entilation
  d.  decr eased motor uni t activ ation of r espiratory muscles
  5.  Which cardiovascular response does not occur during a
resistance ex ercise bout?
  a.  decr eased heart r ate
  b.  incr eased str oke volume
  c.  incr eased car diac output
  d.  incr eased blood pr essure
103