# Chapter 2: Biomechanics of Resistance Exercise

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

**PDF Pages:** 104--173

CHAPTER  2
BIOMECHANICS OF
RESISTANCE EXERCISE
William R. Johnson, PhD, and Jason Lake, PhD
The authors would like to acknowle dge the significant contributions of Jeffrey M.
McBride and Ev erett Harman to this chapter .
After completing this chapter, you will be able to
identi fy the major components of sk eletal musculatur e;
differentiate the v arious t ypes of lev ers of the musculosk eletal
system;
identi fy primary anatomical mo vements during sport activi ties
and ex ercises;
outline cor e mechanical f actors associated wi th mo vement;
describe the f actors contributing to human str ength and power;
evaluate r esistiv e force and power pat terns of ex ercise devices;
and
identi fy factors of importance f or joint biomechanics wi th
exercise.
Knowledge of biomechanics is important for describing and
understanding human movements, including those involved in sport
and exercise. Biomechanics  focuses on the mechanisms  through
104
which the components of the musculosk eletal system interact to
create movement. Having insight into how body movements are
carried out and the stresses that the movements place on the
musculosk eletal system facilitates the design of safe and effective
resistance training programs and maximiz es the potential for human
endur ance, str ength, and power .
This chapter begins with an overview of skeletal musculatur e,
body mechanics, and the primary movement patterns during sport
activities and exercise, followed by biomechanical principles that
connect the manifestation of human strength and movement. Next,
the primary sources of resistance to muscle contraction used in
exercise device s—including gravity, inertia, friction, fluid resistance,
and elastici ty—are discussed. Then we turn to concerns with
resistance training that relate to joint biomechanics (with special
emphasis on the shoulders, back, and knees).
105
Skelet al Musculature
To cause movement or to generate force  against external objects,
both ends of each skeletal muscle must be attached to bone by
connectiv e tissue. Traditional ly, anatomists define the muscle’ s
origin  as its proximal  (toward the center of the body) attachment
and its insertion  as its distal  (away from the center of the body)
attachment. Sometimes the origin is defined as the more stationary
structur e to which the muscle is attached and the insertion as the
more mobile structur e. This defini tion can lead to a confusing
reversal of the origin and insertion. For example, during a straight-
leg sit-up, the origin of the iliacus muscle is the femur, because of its
relative immobi lity. The pelvis, being more mobile, is the insertion.
Howev er, during the leg raise exercise, the pelvis is relatively
immobi le and would therefore become the origin, while the more
mobile femur would become the insertion. The traditional defini tion
therefore provides the most consistency .
Muscles are attached to bone in various ways. In fleshy
attachments , which are most often found at the proximal end of a
muscle, muscle  fibers are directly affixed to the bone, usually over a
wide area so that force is distributed rather than localized. Fibrous
attachments , such as tendons , blend into and are continuous
with both the muscle sheaths and the connectiv e tissue surrounding
the bone. They have additional fibers that extend into the bone
itself, making f or a v ery str ong union.
Virtual ly all body movements  involve the action of more than one
muscle. The muscle most directly involved in bringing about a
movement is called the prime mover, or agonist . A muscle that can
slow down or stop the movement is called the antagonist . The
antagonist assists in joint stabilization and in braking the limb toward
the end of a fast movement, thereby protecting ligamentous and
cartilaginous joint structu res from potential ly destructiv e forces.
During throwing, for example, the triceps acts as an agonist,
extending the elbow to accelerate the ball. As the elbow approaches
106
full extension, the biceps acts as an antagonist to slow down elbow
extension and bring it to a stop, thereby protecting elbow  structur es
from internal impact.
A muscle is called a synergist  when it assists indirectly in a
movement. For example, the muscles that stabilize the scapula act
as syner gists during upper arm movement. Without these syner gists,
the muscles that move the upper arm (many of which originate on
the scapula) would not be effective in bringing about this movement.
Synergists are also required to control body motion when the agonist
is a muscle that crosses two joints. For example, the rectus femoris
muscle crosses the hip and knee, acting to flex the hip and extend
the knee when  contracting. Rising from a low squat involves both hip
and knee extension. If the rectus femoris is to act to extend the
knee as a person rises without inclining the trunk forward, hip
extensor muscles such as the gluteus maximus must act
syner gistical ly to counter act the hip flexion that would otherwise
result from tension in the r ectus f emoris.
Levers of the Musculoskeletal System
Although there are many muscles in the body that do not act
through levers, such as muscles of the face, tongue, heart, arteries,
and sphincters, body movements directly involved in sport and
exercise prima rily act through the bony levers of the skeleton. In
order to understand how the body affects such movements, a basic
knowledge of lev ers is r equired. Several basic defini tions f ollow.
first-class lever—A lever for which the muscle force and resistiv e
force act on opposi te sides of the f ulcrum ( figure 2.1).
107
FIGURE 2.1 A first-class lever (the forearm). Elbow extension against resistance (e.g., a
triceps extension exercise).  O = fulcrum ; FM = muscle force; FR = resistiv e force; MM =
moment arm of the muscle force; MR = momen t arm of the resistiv e force. Mechanical
advantage = MM/MR = 5 cm/40 cm = 0.125, which, being less than 1.0, is a disadv antage
in the common sense.
fulcrum— The piv ot point of a lev er.
lever— A rigid or semirigid body that, when subjected to a force
whose line of action does not pass through its pivot point, exerts
force on an y object impeding i ts tendency to r otate ( figure 2.2).
108
FIGURE 2.2 A lever. The lever can transmi t force tangential to the arc of rotation from
one contact point along the object ’s length to another . FA = force applied to the lever; MAF
= moment arm of the applied force; FR = force resisting the lever’s rotation;  MRF = moment
arm of the resistiv e force. The lever applies a force on the object equal in magnitude to but
opposi te in dir ection f rom FR.
mechanical advantage— The ratio of the moment arm through
which an applied force acts to that through which a resistiv e force
acts. For there to be a state of equilibrium between the applied
and resistiv e torques, the product of the muscle force and the
moment arm through which it acts must equal the product of the
resistiv e force and the moment arm through which it acts.
Therefore, a mechanical advantage, represented as a ratio greater
than 1.0, allows the applied (muscle) force to be less than the
resistiv e force to produce an equal amount of torque. Conversely ,
a calculated mechanical advantage of a ratio less than 1.0
indicates that one must apply greater (muscle) force than the
amount of resistiv e force present, creating an obvious
disadv antage f or the muscle.
moment arm (also called force arm, lever arm, or torque arm)—
The perpendicular distance from the line of action of the force to
the fulcrum. The line of action of a force is an infinitely long line
passing through the point of application of the force, oriented in
the dir ection in which the f orce is ex erted.
muscle force— Force gener ated by biochem ical activity, or the
stretching of noncontr actile tissue, which tends to draw the
opposi te ends of a muscle tow ard each other .
109
resistive force— Force generated by a source external to the body
(e.g., gravity, inertia, f riction) that acts contr ary to muscle f orce.
second-class lever— A lever for which the muscle force and
resistiv e force act on the same side of the fulcrum, with the
muscle force acting through a moment arm longer than that
through which the resistiv e force acts, as when the calf muscles
work to raise the body onto the balls of the feet (figure 2.3). Due
to its mechanical advantage (i.e., relatively long moment arm),
the required muscle force is smaller than the resistiv e force (body
weight).
third-class lever— A lever for which the muscle force and resistiv e
force act on the same side of the fulcrum, with the muscle force
acting through a moment arm shorter than that through which
the resistive force acts (figure 2.4). The mechan ical advantage is
thus less than 1.0, so the muscle force has to be greater than the
resistiv e force to produce torque equal to that produced by the
resistiv e force.
torque  (also called moment )—The degree to which a force tends
to rotate an object about a specified fulcrum. It is defined
quanti tatively as the magni tude of a force times the length of its
moment arm.
110
FIGURE 2.3 A second-class lever (the foot). Plantar flexion against resistance (e.g., a
standing heel raise exercise).  FM = muscle force; FR = resistiv e force; MM = moment arm of
the muscle  force; MR = momen t arm of the resistiv e force. When the body is raised, the ball
of the foot, being the point about which the foot rotates, is the fulcrum  (O). Because MM is
greater than  MR, FM is less than  FR.
Figure 2.1 shows a first-class lever, because muscle force and
resistiv e force act on opposi te sides of the fulcrum. During isometric
exertion or constant -speed joint rotation, FM × MM = FR × MR.
Because MM is much smaller than MR, FM must be much  greater than
FR; this illustrates the disadv antageous nature of this arrangement
(i.e., a large muscle force is required to push against a relatively
small external r esistance).
111
FIGURE 2.4 A third-class lever (the forearm). Elbow flexion against resistance (e.g., a
biceps curl exercise).  FM = muscle force; FR = resistiv e force; MM = moment arm of the
muscle force; MR = moment arm of the resistiv e force. Because  MM is much smaller than
MR, FM must be much gr eater than  FR.
Most human muscles that rotate the limbs about body joints
operate at a mechanical advantage of less than 1.0 (that is, at a
mechanical disadvantage). This is why internal muscle forces are
much greater than the forces exerted by the body on external
objects. For example, in figure 2.2, becau se the resistance moment
arm is eight times longer than the muscle moment arm, muscle
force must be eight times the resistiv e force. The extremely high
internal forces experienced by muscles and tendons account in large
part for injury to these tissues. During actual movement, the
categorization of a lever as first, second, or third class often depends
on the somewhat arbitrary decision of where the fulcrum lies.
Therefore, understanding the principle of mechanical advantage is of
much gr eater importance than being able to classi fy levers.
112
Mechanical advantage often changes continuously during real-
world activi ties. The f ollowing ar e examples of this.
113
FIGURE 2.5 Mechanical advantage at the knee.  (a) The patella increases the mechanical
advantage of the quadriceps muscle group by maintaining the quadriceps tendon’ s distance
from the knee’s axis of rotation.  (b) Absence of the patella allows the tendon to fall closer
114
to the knee’s cente r of rotation, shortening the moment arm through which the muscle
force acts and ther eby reducing the muscle’ s mechanical adv antage.
Reprinted by permission from B.A. Gowitzke and M. Milner, Scientific Bases of Human Movement (Williams &
Wilkins,1988), 17.
For movements such as knee extension and flexion, where the
joint is not a true hinge, the location of the axis of rotation
changes continuously throughout the range of motion,
affecting the length of the moment arm through which the
quadriceps and hamstrings  act. For knee extension, the
patella, or kneecap , helps to prevent large changes in the
mechanical advantage of the quadriceps muscle by keeping
the quadriceps  tendon from falling in close to the axis of
rotation ( figure 2.5; 17).
For movement s such as elbow extension and flexion, there is
no structure such as the patella to keep the perpendi cular
distance from the joint axis of rotation to the tendon’ s line of
action r elatively constant ( figure 2.6).
During resistance training with free weights, the moment arm
through which the weight acts equals the horizontal distance
from a line through the center of mass of the barbe ll or
dumbbel l to the body joint about which rotation of the limb
occurs; the resistiv e moment arm thus varies throughout the
movement ( figure 2.7).
115
FIGURE 2.6 Mechanical advantage at the elbow . During elbow flexion with the biceps
muscle, the perpendicular distance from the joint axis of rotation to the tendon’ s line of
action varies throughout the range of joint motion. When the moment arm (M) is shorter ,
there is less mechanical adv antage.
116
FIGURE 2.7 As a free weight  is lifted, the moment arm (M) through which the weight
acts, and thus the resistiv e torque, changes with the horizontal distance from the weight to
the elbow .
Most of the skeletal muscles operate at a considerable
mechanical disadvantage due to the lever arrangement
within the body and relative to the external forces the
body resists. Thus, during sport and other physical
activities, forces in the muscles and tendons are much
117
higher than those exert ed by the hands or feet on
external objects or the ground.
Variations in Tendon Insertion
Consider able variation in human anatomical structur e exists,
including the points at which tendons are attached to bone. A person
whose tendon s are inserted on the bone farther from the joint
center should be able to lift heavier weights because muscle force
acts through a longer moment arm and thus can produce greater
torque around the joint. (In figure 2.6, for example, consider how
the moment arm [M] would change  if the tendo n insertion were
farther to the right.) It is important, howev er, to recogniz e the trade-
off involved in tendon insertion. The mechanical advantage gained
by having tendons insert farther from the joint center is
accompanied by a loss of maximum speed because, with the tendon
inserted farther from the joint center , the muscle has to contract
more to make the joint move through a given range of motion. In
other words, a given amount of muscle shortening results in less
rotation of body segments about a joint, which translates into a loss
in movement speed. Figure 2.8a shows that, starting with the joint
extended, when a hypothetic al muscle shortens by a given amount,
the joint rotates by 37 degrees. Howev er, if the muscle were
inserted farther from the joint center , as in figure 2.8b, the same
amount of muscle shortening  would bring about only 34 degrees of
joint rotation because of the geometry of the dynamic triangle
whose vertices are the muscle insertion and origin and the joint
center of r otation.
118
119
FIGURE 2.8 Changes in joint angle with equal increments of muscle shortening when the
tendon is inserted  (a) closer to and (b) farther from the joint center . Configur ation b has a
larger moment arm and thus greater torque for a given muscle force but less rotation per
unit of muscle contr action and thus slower mo vement speed.
To produce a given joint rotational velocity, a muscle inserted
farther from the joint center must contract at a higher speed, at
which it can generate less force due to the inverse force–velocity
relationship of muscle (45, 46) described later in this chapter .
Therefore, such a tendon arrangement reduces the muscle’ s force
capabi lity during f aster mo vements.
One can see how relatively subtle individual differences in
structur e can result in various advantages and disadvantages.
Although these skeletal arrangements are nonmodi fiable, it is
important to understand that for slower movements, as in
powerl ifting, tendon insertion farther from the joint than normal can
be advantageous, while for athletic activities occurring at high
speeds, such as hitting a tennis ball, such an arrangeme nt can be
disadv antageous.
120
Anatomical Planes and Major Body
Movements
Figure 2.9a illustrates a person standing in the standar d
anatomical position , standing upright, arms by the sides, and with
the palms facing forward. So-called anatomical views of the body are
often used in clinical settings (e.g., medical imaging), but in
biomechanics they also provide reference positions that can be used
when describing human movement. The sagittal , frontal , and
transverse planes  present the body as if sliced into left–right,
front–back, and upper –lowe r sections, respectiv ely, although not
necessari ly through the midpoint. Examples of exercise movements
that take place in these three planes include the biceps curl (sagittal;
figure 2.9b), lateral raise (frontal; figure 2.9c), and dumbbel l fly
(transverse; figure 2.9d).
Biomechanical analysis of human movement can be used to select
and quanti tatively analyz e the target activity. Depending on its
complexi ty, often simple visual observ ation is adequate for
identi fying the basic features of the movement pattern and the
opportuni ties for developing or maintaining postur al form to achiev e
the desired performance outcome. Exercises can be selected that
target a similar plane of movement around the same joints, thereby
promoting specificity of training. Then with practice, this approach
can be extended to compound exercises, which concurr ently use
multiple planes of mo vement.
Figure 2.10 presents a grid of body movements that could be
used to develop a programming approach oriented to specific
anatomical planes. Selecting exercises for which the dominant plane
is either sagittal, frontal, or transverse might seem restrictive, but
since few body movements occur in one of these major  planes in
isolation, there is usually a cross-tr aining effect; that is, exercising
muscles within the planes also strengthens them for movements
between the planes. Although a program providing resistance
121
exercises for all the movements in figure 2.10 would be both
compr ehensiv e and balanced, some of the movements are
commonly omitted from standar d exercise programs whereas others
receive particular emphasis.
FIGURE 2.9 The three planes  of the human body in the (a) anatomical position with
exercise examples:  (b) biceps curl (sagittal), (c) lateral raise (frontal), and (d) dumbbel l fly
(transverse).
Standar d resistance training programs often lack particular sport-
specific exercises, such as shoulder internal and external rotation
(used in throwing, serving, pitching, or bowling), knee flexion
122
(sprinting), hip flexion (kicking, sprinting), ankle dorsiflexion
(running), hip internal and external rotation (landing, pivoting), hip
adduction and abduction (lateral cutting or changing direction), and
torso transverse rotation  (throwing, hitting, or batting).
Incorpor ating the principle of dynamic correspondence into training
programs can enhance their effectiveness for sport performance.
This principle involves elemen ts such as the amplitude and direction
of movements, accentuated regions of force production, dynamics of
effort, rate and timing of maximum force production, regime of
muscular work, and segmental interr elation (16, 55). By considering
these criteria and accounting for the multiplanar contributions of
muscles, joints, and body segments, strength and conditioning
professionals can create exercise programs that more effectively
target specific sporting activities, thereby maximizing their athletes’
chances of suc cess.
123
124
FIGURE 2.10 Major body movements. Planes of movement are relative to the body in
the anato mical position unless otherwise stated. Common exercises that provide resistance
to the mo vements and r elated sport activi ties ar e listed.
125
126
FIGURE 2.10  (continued)
127
Human Strength and Power
The terms strength  and power  are widely used to describe some
important abilities that contribute to maximal human efforts in sport
and other physical activities. Unfortunately , there is often little
consistency in the way the terms are used. This section provides a
scienti fic basis for understanding human strength and power and
shows how v arious f actors contribute to their mani festation.
Basic Definitions
Though it is widely accepted that strength  is the ability to exert
force, there is consider able disagreement as to how strength should
be measured. The load that a person can lift is probably the oldest
quanti tative measur e of strength. Technological developments have
populariz ed the use of isometric strength testing and also isokinetic
strength testing. All sports involve acceleration  (the change in
velocity  with respect to time) of the body, a sporting implement
(e.g., basebal l bat, javelin, tennis racket), or both. Acceleration is
associated with resistiv e force according to Isaac Newton’ s second
law of motion:
  F = m × a     (2.1)
Where F refers to force, m refers to mass, and a refers to
acceleration. For clarity, force can be thought of as how hard we
push or pull something, while mass  refers to the stuff (e.g., bone,
muscle, and organs) that we are made of. Although it can seem
abstract, the impulse–mom entum relationship , an extension of
equation 2.1, pr ovides mor e context (equation 2.2).
  F × Δt = m × Δv    (2.2)
where everything to the left of the equal sign describes impulse
and everything  to the right of the equal sign describes momentum
(more specifically, a change  in momentum ). This means that to
cause (or control) the movement of an object (i.e., the mass of the
128
athlete, implement, or both) , a certain amount of force has to be
applied over the a vailable time.
Here we have a cause and effect. For example, we know that
vertical jump height is dictated by the vertical velocity that the
jumper achiev es at takeoff. Therefore, if a jumper with a mass of 74
kilograms (the athlete’ s weight is 74 kg × gravity = 725.94 newtons)
wants to jump 40 centimeters, the athlete will have to take off at a
vertical velocity of 2.82 m/s. This means that the athlete will have to
apply an impulse of 210 Ns (newton-seconds). There is no way
around this. If the athlete cannot achiev e the necessary 210 Ns
impulse, the athlete will not achiev e the desired jump height. How
the athlete achiev es this impulse is another matter, though, because,
as equation 2.2 shows, impul se is the product of net force (force not
including body weight) and time.
To illustrate this point, the athlete could achiev e the same jump
height by applying a mean net force of 1,000 newtons over 0.210
seconds, 800 newtons over 0.263 seconds, 600 newtons over 0.350
seconds, or 400 newtons over 0.525 seconds. Of course, we would
ideally like the athlete to get to a point where the athlete can apply
as much force as possible so as to perform the vertical jump (or any
other movement of interest) as quickly as possible. Finally, both
impulse and momentum are vector  quanti ties, which means that
the athlete considers both magni tude (how much) and direction
(which way); this is critical to sport performance. With this in mind,
the strength and condi tioning professional can use this information
to develop testing protocols to establ ish the athlete’ s capaci ty to
apply force over different time periods or against different loads.
This will help the strength and condi tioning professional to get a
more complete pictur e of whether the athlete is able to use current
strength levels and to assess whether they change because of
sporting demands or training. Another way that strength and
condi tioning professionals have used biomechanical concepts to
assess the athlete’ s capaci ty to apply force over different time
129
periods and against different loads has been with work and power
(8).
The Impulse–Momentum Relationship
Male rugby athletes  can jump between  0.37 and 0.44 meters (1.21-1.44 ft) (42).
To jump 0.37 meters, they need to leave the ground at 2.694 m/s. Impulse (force
× time) changes momentum (mass × velocity). Because mass does not change,
only velocity needs to change. To do this at 95.2 kilograms (209.9 lb), they need to
apply 256.6 newto n-seconds of impulse. To do this from a propulsion phase of
0.232 seconds means applying a force 1105.6 newtons over their body weight. To
jump 0.44 meters (16% more), heavier rugby athletes (98.2 kg [216.5 lb]) must
leave the ground at 2.938 m/s, which requires 288.5 newton-seconds. They
achiev e this b y applying 7% less f orce over 17% mor e time.
Positive Work and Power
When we apply  force to an object that is moving, we are performing
work . In a biomec hanical context, work can be understood  in a
simpler form as the product of force and displacement  (how far
the object moves). This is often how work is described in resistance
training and is familiar to many athletes and strength and
condi tioning pr ofessionals.
Howev er, work can also be understood as the change in the
mechanical energy of an object. Mechanical energy  is the sum of
potential energy  and kinetic energy  (equations 2.3 and 2.4):
  Potential energy = m × g × h    (2.3)
where m is mass (as described above), g is the acceleration due to
gravity (9.81 m ∙ s−²), and h is the change in height (or position).
This r epresents the ener gy an object has because of i ts posi tion.
  Kinetic energy = ½ m × v²    (2.4)
where m is mass and v is velocity. This represents the energy an
object has due to i ts mo vement.
Together , these two forms of energy determine the total
mechanical energy change, which is key to understanding the work
130
done in dynamic mo vements such as jumping or sprinting.
Finally, power  refers to how quickly work is performed. In its
simplest form, power is the amount of work divided by the time over
which the force is applied. Athletes in many sports aim to maximiz e
power output, meaning they strive to apply as much force as
possible over the shortest time frame to achiev e the required
movement.
For all the equations in this chapter to work out correctly,
consistent units must be used. In the International System of Units
(SI, abbreviated from French), the worldwide standar d, force is
measur ed in newtons (N), length (e.g., distance and displacement)
in meters (m), work in joules (J, i.e., newton-meters, or N · m), time
in seconds (s), and power in watts (W, i.e., J/s). The appropriate SI
units for the equations can be obtained from other common units
using the f actors l isted in table 2.1  (47a).
TABLE 2.1  Units of Measure and Conversions
QuantitySI
(international)
unitConversion
multiplierTraditional
(British)
unitConversion
multiplierSI
(international)
unit
Distance meter × 3.28 = foot × 0.3048 = meter
Distance kilometer × 0.621 = mile × 1.61 = kilometer
Angle radian × 57.3 = degree × 0.0175 = radian
Velocitymeters/second × 2.24 = miles/hour × 0.447 = meters/second
Velocitykilometers/hour × 0.621 = miles/hour × 1.609 = kilometers/hour
Force newton × 0.225 = pound × 4.45 = newton
Force kilogram × 2.205 = pound × 0.4535 = kilogram
Work,
energyjoule × 0.738 = foot-pound × 1.356 = joule
Power watt × 0.0013 = horsepower × 745. 7 = watt
Reprinted by permission from D.W. Powell and M.A. Bryanton Jones, “Biomechanics, ” in
NSCA ’s Essentials of Personal Training, 3rd ed., edited by B.J. Schoenfeld, R.L. Snarr
(Human Kinetics, 2022), 45.
131
QuantitySI
(international)
unitConversion
multiplierTraditional
(British)
unitConversion
multiplierSI
(international)
unit
Torque newton-meter × 0.738 = foot-pound × 1.356 = newton-meter
Reprinted by permission from D.W. Powell and M.A. Bryanton Jones, “Biomechanics, ” in
NSCA ’s Essentials of Personal Training, 3rd ed., edited by B.J. Schoenfeld, R.L. Snarr
(Human Kinetics, 2022), 45.
We can measur e the velocity of the barbel l with measur ement
devices such as accelerometers (measur es the acceleration of the
object from which velocity can be calculated) and linear position
transducers (devices that have a cable that is extracted as the
barbel l is lifted upward, and retracts as it is lower ed, recording how
far and how fast this happens). Consider a set of standing overhead
barbel l presses with 60 kilograms for which we have velocity data.
How can we calculate the work performed to move the barbel l? The
displacement of the barbel l during the first repetition was 0.541
meters. We take this and multiply it by the mass of the barbell and
then mul tiply this b y gravity using equation 2.3 l ike so:
60 kg × 9.81 m ∙ s−2 × 0.541 m = 318.43 J    (2.5)
Or we could calculate potential energy and kinetic energy on a
sample-b y-sample basis. The linear position transducer  that was
used to collect the barbel l press velocity data records at a sampl ing
frequency of 1,000 hertz (Hz, or samples per second). We then add
these together and calculate the change, which provides the same
result as the one shown in equation 2.5. What happens if the barbel l
mass is increased or it is lifted over a greater range of motion? If we
add 20 kilograms to the barbel l and lift it over the same range of
movement, the work performed on it increases to 424.58 joules. To
achiev e that amount of work with the same load on the barbel l, the
athlete would have to lift it over approximately 33% farther (0.721
m vs. 0.541 m). If this athlete performs multiple repetitions during a
set and, as should be the case, the range of movement remains
fairly constant, we can multiply the work performed on the barbel l
132
(as calculated using equation 2.3) by the number of repetitions to
calculate the amount of work performed during the set. We can do
this over all sets of this exercise or all sets of all exercises for which
we are able to calculate work with a degree of accuracy, and we can
use this to pr ovide an estimate of workload.
Power  is the rate that work is performed with respect to time, so
to calculate power, we need a way to record the time element. In
the previous barbel l press example, this is the duration of the
concentric (upward) phase over which the work was performed—in
that case, 0.815 seconds. The power achiev ed by pressing a 60-
kilogram barbel l 0.541 meters overhead in 0.815 seconds is 390.71
watts. And again, we can manipulate this by either performing more
work in the same time or by performing the same work in less time
(to incr ease power).
Over the years, developments in technology have enabled
simultaneous recording of force and movement characteristics such
as displacement and velocity. This has enabled resear chers and
practitioners to more easily calculate biomechanical ly derived
performance metrics such as work and power , and while time-
efficient performance tracking processes are critical, it can mean that
important theoretical underpinnings are lost. Where it is possible to
simultaneously record the force causing the velocity of a movement,
power can be calculated by simply multiplying these two values. In
doing this, the calculation of work and the time taken to perform it
can be skipped entirely. This is a missed opportuni ty to gain the
fullest understanding of the athlete’ s capaci ty at that point in time
because this is information that could help inform what the athlete
needs to do to impr ove their power capaci ty.
The ability to simultaneously record force and movement
characteristics such as displacement and velocity has also led to the
measur ement, calculation, and use of peak power , which is
frequently referred to as the highest instant aneous power . While this
can result in some impressive numbers, the fact that it refers to the
rate of work performed over one data sampl ing window is frequently
133
ignored, so its biomechan ical relevance is misunder stood. For
example, many systems record data at 1,000 hertz, which means
data are recorded every 1 millisecond (ms). Is the rate that work is
performed over 1 millisecond relevant? Caution is urged when
considering this approach, and unless there is a specific need to
know the rate of work over a single sample, it should be ignored. For
example, the maximum instantaneous power in the previous barbel l
overhead press example was 642.63 watts, which describes the work
performed in moving the barbel l 1 millimeter . Nowhe re is this
method more popular than in vertical jump resear ch. Going back to
the example of the 74-kilogram, 40-centimeter jumper , the work the
athlete performs during the propulsion phase of the jump (from the
lowest squat to takeoff) is 295.57 joules, the athlete performs this
over 0.315 seconds, and so achiev es 938.31 watts of power . The
peak power achiev ed during the same propulsion phase was 2040.68
watts, where the work performed involved 2 millimeters of
displacement (of the jumper ’s center of mass).
We must mention an important limitation of using work and
power to quanti fy movement  performance. Both of these are scalar
quanti ties, which means that they only provide a magn itude (how
much) and cannot consider movement direction. Considering the
importance of movement direction in sport and occupational
performance, work and powe r should be used with this limitation in
mind. Requirin g nothing more than a tape measur e and patience,
practitioners can use work to quanti fy training load.
Negative Work and Power
When both force and movement are positive, both work and power
will be positive too. In the earlier barbel l pressing example, the lifter
applies a positive force to push the barbel l upward, so both force
and movement are positive. Howev er, while during the lowering
phase of the exercise the force remains positive (to control the
barbel l’s desce nt), its movement is negativ e (because it is traveling
down ward). We can use equation 2.3 to calculate the work
134
performed but this time replacing the positive displacement value
(0.541 m) with a negativ e displacement value (−0.541 m). Because
the only thing that has chang ed is movement direction, and because
the range of motion should be the same, the lowering phase work is
−318.43 J. This means that the power achiev ed during the lowering
phase will be negativ e too. So far, we have consider ed how the
application of force enables us to perform linear movement and work
(movement over straight and curved paths). In the next section, we
will explore how force applied to an object or body part results in
rotational movement, such as when a segment of the body (e.g., the
forearm) r otates ar ound a joint l ike the elbow .
Relating Angular and Linear Motion
In biomechanics, we call body parts starting at a joint (e.g., the lower arm from
the elbow)  segments . If we flex the elbow to curl a dumbbel l, the lower arm
moves closer to the upper arm and the elbow angle decreases. The opposi te is
true when we lower the dumbbel l. How far the dumbbel l moves depends on the
lower -arm length and change in elbow angle. If someone with a 0.32 meters-long
(1.05 ft) lower arm flexes the elbow by 1.88 radians (about 108 degrees), the
dumbbel l will move 0.60 meters (1.97 ft). Increasing the elbow flexion to 2.27
radians (about 130 degrees) increases the dumbbel l movement to 0.73 meters
(2.40 ft). T ry this wi th different segment lengths and joint angular displacements.
Rotation Force and Movement
Because the body is a system of levers (see Levers of the
Musculosk eletal System), most movement is borne from the rotation
of different parts of the body, all frequently contributin g to more
gener al movement. We use slightly different conventions to describe
rotation (or angular movement), the forces that cause it, and its
results. When the force of a contracting muscle (or muscles) causes
the movement of a body segment, such as the forearm as it rotates
around the elbow , we can quanti fy this by multiplying  the force
required to cause the movement by the length of the forearm and
the sine of the joint angle (e.g., elbow , figure 2.4, page 30). The
result is a torque (τ), although moment  is frequently used
135
interchangeably . The subsequent movement is angular
displacement  (θ) which is measur ed in radians, and the rate of
angular displac ement is angular veloc ity (ω). While we should use
the correct measur ement (SI) units if we want to perform certain
calculations with our data (e.g., convert linear motion to angular
motion), measur ement units like the radian can seem quite abstract,
so they are frequently converted to degrees, which are often easier
to conceptual ize. To convert radians to degrees, we can use the
calculation shown in equati on 2.6, multiplying measur ements in
radians by 57.3. On the matter of measur ement units, while we saw
earlier that work can be reported in newton-meters (N ∙ m), it is also
the measur ement unit for torque and the one we will use throughout
this section.
  1 radian = 180 degrees ÷  π = 57.3    (2.6)
Consider the dumbbel l curl exercise where forearm length is 0.30
meters (0.98 ft), the dumbbel l is 25 kilograms (55 lb), and the lifter
is able to keep the upper arm tight against the body, preventing it
from moving as he or she curls it through a vertical displacement of
0.60 meters (1.97 ft) in 1.283 seconds. The (linear) work performed
by the lifter would be 140.64 joules at a linear power output of
109.59 watts. The angular displacement is 2.02 radians (or
approximately 116 degrees), and the average angular velocity (Δ
joint angle ÷ time) is 1.57 radians per second (or 90 degrees per
second). The average torque necessary to displace the dumbbel l
through that range of motion is 59.1 newton-meters, although this
varies depending on the elbow joint angle where 27.7 newton-
meters is required at the start (43 degrees), which gradual ly
increases to 74.3 newton-m eters when the elbow joint is at 90
degrees and then decreases to 50.2 newton-meters as the angle
decreases to 43 degrees at the end of the concentric phase. We can
calculate the required torque at a given joint angle by first
multiplying the mass of the dumbbel l by the acceleration of gravity
and then multiplying the length of the forearm (from elbow  center to
dumbbel l center) by the sine of the joint angle. At the start angle of
136
2.76 radians (158 degrees) and with the above information, the
torque required to start the curl can be calculated using equation
2.7:
(25 kg ∙  g) × 0.30 m (elbow to dumbbell center) × sin(2.76 radians) = 27.4
N ∙ m    (2.7)
This means that 124.3 joules of angular work is performed over
1.283 seconds at an angular power output of 96.9 watts. As earlier,
we can manipulate the angular work that is performed by changing
the mass of the object being moved, the range of motion, or both.
With angular power , time provides another element that can be
manipulated, because performing more work does not necessari ly
mean a higher power outpu t unless any increase in performance
duration is minimiz ed.
Impulse also has a rotational equiv alent (angular impulse), which
is the product of torque and time (τ × Δt, where τ refers to torque,
and Δt refers to the duration of the phase of interest). As with the
linear impulse–momentum relationship , angular impulse is directly
proportional to the change in angular momentum (ΔL), and because
mass tends to remain constant, we can simplify this to angular
impulse being proportional to a change in angular velocity (Δω). As
with linear impulse, to move (rotate) faster, more (angular) impulse
must be applied, and we know that this can be achiev ed by applying
more torque, applying the same torque for longer , or a combination
of both.
Strength Versus Power
The discrepancy between the common and scienti fic defini tions of
power has led to misunders tandings. For example, in the sport of
powerl ifting, which involves high forces but relatively low movement
speeds, less mechanical power is produced than in several other
sports, including weightl ifting (8, 14). Despi te the discrepancy , the
sport of powerl ifting is unlikely to be renamed. In all other contexts,
the strength and condi tioning professional should use the word
power  only in its scienti fic sense to avoid ambigui ty and instead
137
consider movement velocity, where how quickly a movement is
performed is of interest. Furthermor e, although the word strength  is
often associated with slow velocities and the word power  with high
velocities of movement, both variables reflect the ability to exert
force at a given velocity. Power is a direct mathematical function of
force and velocity (which is why it becomes a scalar quanti ty).
Earlier we saw that impulse is directly proportional to a change in
velocity, providing a cause and effect. Therefore, it is not correct to
associate strength with low speed and power with high speed.
Strength is the capaci ty to exert force, and the amount of force we
can apply over given time periods dictates how quickly the object
this force is being applied to will move. If we need to move the
object more quickly , we have to apply more impulse, and the
consti tuent parts of the impulse equation that we change will be
dictated by task demands and performance constr aints (e.g., time).
Where time is constr ained,  this means applying more force to
balance this, and then if we need to move faster but cannot change
the time constr aint, this will mean developing the capaci ty to apply
even more force during this time period. What is critical is the ability
to exert force at velocities characteristic of a given sport to
overcome gravity and accelerate the body or an implement. For a
sport movement made relatively slow by high resistance, low-
velocity strength is critical, whereas for a movement that is very fast
due to low resistance, high-velocity strength is important. For
example, when  offensive and defensive American footba ll linemen
push against each other, their velocity of movement is slowed by the
muscular force exerted by the opposing player as well as the inertia
of the opposing player’s body mass. Because the muscles are
prevented from contracting at high velocity, the ability to exert force
and power at low velocity is an important component of
performance. In contrast, a badminton athlete’ s muscles quickly
reach high velocity as a result of the minimal inertial resistance of
the lightweight racket and the athlete’ s arm. Therefore, the ability to
138
exert force and power at high velocity is critical to making rapid
adjustments in a str oke.
Key phases  of the weightlifting movements  are
constrained by time because of the way the lifter
interacts with  the barbell. In powerlifting this is not the
case, which is reflected in the impulse required to
displace the barbell. The time constraints of
weightlifting require the application of more force
(relative to the barbell mass) in less time.
Biomechanical Factors in H uman Strength
Several biomechanical factors are involved in the manifestation of
human strength, including neural control, muscle cross-sectional
area, muscle fiber arrangement, muscle length, joint angle, muscle
contraction velocity, joint angular velocity, and body size. These
factors are discussed next, as are the three-dimensional strength
relationship and the str ength-to-mass r atio.
Neural Control
Neural control affects the maximal force output of a muscle by
determining which and how many motor units are involved in a
muscle contraction (recruitment ) and the rate at which the motor
units are fired (rate coding ) (6). Gener ally, muscle force is greater
when more motor units are involved in a contraction, the motor units
are greater in size, or the rate of firing is faster. Much of the
improvement in strength evidenced in the first few weeks of
resistance training is attributable to neural adaptations as the brain
learns how to gener ate more force from a given amount of
contractile tissue (44). It is not unusual f or novice r esistance tr ainees
to become discour aged when they cannot maintain the rate of
increase of the first few training weeks. It is important for them to
realize that continued improvement will result if they adhere to the
139
training regimen, although via slower mechanisms such as muscle
hypertr ophy.
Muscle Cross-Sectional Area
All else being equal, the force a muscle can exert is related to its
cross-sectional area rather than to its volume (15, 41). For example,
if two athletes of similar percent body fat but different height have
the same biceps circumference, their upper arm muscle cross-
sectional areas are about the same. Although the taller (and
therefore heavier) athlete’ s longer muscle makes for greater muscle
volume, the strength of the two athletes’ biceps should be about the
same. With the same strength but greater body weight, the taller
athlete has less ability to lift and accelerate his or her own body—for
example, when performing calisthenics or gymnastics. This is why
most elite gymnasts are not very tall. As described in chapter 1,
resistance training increases both the strength and cross-sectional
area of muscle.
Arrangement of Muscle Fibers
Maximal ly contracting muscles have been found capable of
gener ating forces of 23 to 145 pounds per squar e inch (psi) (16-100
N/cm2) of muscle cross-sectional area (28). This wide range can be
partial ly accounted for by the variation in the arrangement and
alignment of sarcomer es in relation to the long axis of the muscle
(figure 2.11) (28). A pennate muscle  has fibers that align obliquely
with the tendo n, creating a featherl ike arrangement. The angle of
pennation  is defined as the angle between the muscle fibers and
an imaginary line between the muscle’ s origin and insertion; 0
degrees corr esponds to no pennation.
Many human muscles are pennated (27, 51, 53), but few have
angles of pennation in excess of 15 degrees. Actual ly, the angle of
pennation does not remain constant for a given muscle but increases
as the muscle shortens. Any factor that affects angle of pennation
would thus affect strength and velocity of shortening as long as the
140
cross-sectional area remains the same. Muscles with greater
pennation have more sarcomer es in parallel and fewer sarcomer es in
series; they are therefore better able to generate force but have a
lower maximal shortening velocity than non-pennate muscles. In
comparison, lesser amounts of pennation can be advantageous for
producing high velocities due to the greater number of sarcomer es
in a row, at the expense of number of sarcomer es in parallel. The
amount of pennation, howev er, has an effect on the muscles’ ability
to gener ate eccentric, isometric, or low-speed concentric force (60).
Most importantly , although angle of pennation may vary depending
on hereditary factors, it is modifiable through training, which could
help account for some of the differences in strength and speed seen
in individuals who seem to ha ve muscles of the same siz e.
FIGURE 2.11  Muscle fiber arr angements and an example of each.
141
Muscle Length
At rest, actin and myosin filaments in muscle fibers lie alongside
each other, allowing for a maximal number of potential crossbridge
sites (figure 2.12; see chapter 1 for more details). This alignment
enables the muscle to generate the greatest force at its resting
length. When the muscle is stretched beyond its resting length,
fewer actin and myosin filaments align next to each other, reducing
the number of potential crossbridge sites and, consequently , the
force the muscle can generate. In this stretched state, a third
filament, titin, is recogniz ed to play a critical role in force
development. Titin not only contributes to structur al alignment but
also possesses mechanosensing properties. During eccentric muscle
actions beyond resting length, the increase in calcium concentr ation
in the sarcoplasm causes the spring-l ike titin to tighten. This
tightening helps in force production and aligns myosin filaments to
increase the potential crossbridge sites (23, 24, 61). Under load, titin
is considered to be a key influencer in trophic signal ing, which can
be a contributor to skeletal muscle hypertr ophy (26). Conversely ,
when the muscle contracts too much below its resting length, the
actin filaments overlap excessiv ely, reducing the number of
crossbridge si tes and thus decr easing f orce gener ation capabi lity.
Joint Angle
Because all body movements , even those occurring in a straight line,
take place by means of rotation about a joint or joints, the forces
that muscles produce must be manifested as torques; recall that a
higher torque value indicate s a greater tendency for the applied
force to rotate the limb or body part about a joint. Conseq uently , we
speak of torque versus joint angle rather than force versus joint
angle. The amount of torque that can be exerted about a given body
joint varies throughout the joint’s range of motion, largely because
of the relationship of force versus muscle length, as well as the ever-
changing leverage brought about by the dynamic geometry of the
muscles, tendo ns, and internal joint structur es. This is shown in
142
figures 2.2, 2.3, and 2.4 (pages 29-30 ). Additional factors include
the type of exercise (isotonic, isometric, and so on), the body joint in
question, the muscles used at that joint, and the speed of
contraction (13).
FIGURE 2.12 A schem atic of the interaction between actin, myosin, and titin filaments
when the muscle is at its resting length and when it is contracted or stretched. Muscle force
capabi lity is greatest when the muscle is at its resting length because of increased
opportuni ty for actin–m yosin crossbrid ges, while titin contributes to force production and
alignment during ec centric muscle actions bey ond resting length.
Muscle Contraction Velocity
Classic experim ents by A.V. Hill (25, 35) on isolated animal muscle
showed that the force capabi lity of muscle declines as the velocity of
contraction increases. The relationship is not linear; the decline in
force capabi lity is steepest over the lower range of movement
speeds (figure 2.13; 30). Human movement technique can make the
best of this relationship . For example, as a vertical jump begins, the
arms swing upward, thereby exerting down ward force on the body
at the shoulders, slowing the upward movement of the body, and
forcing the hip and knee extensor muscles to contract more slowly
143
than they otherwise would, enabl ing them to gener ate higher forces
for longer times.
Joint Angular Velocity
There are three basic t ypes of muscle action, during which f orces ar e
gener ated within the muscle that pull the muscle’ s ends toward each
other if not prevented from doing so by external forces. The term
muscle action  is preferable to contraction , becau se the latter means
“shortening, ” which does not accurately describe two of the three
muscle actions.
In a concentric muscle action , the muscle shortens
because the contractile force is greater than the resistiv e
force. The forces gener ated within the muscle and acting to
shorten it are greater than the external forces acting at its
tendons to stretch it. Swimming and cycling involve concentric
muscle action almost ex clusiv ely.
In an eccentric muscle action , the muscle lengthens
because the contractile force is less than the resistiv e force.
The forces gener ated within the muscle and acting to shorten
it are less than the external forces acting at its tendon s to
stretch it (which increases the risk of soreness and injury).
This occurs during the lowering phase of any resistance
exercise. Durin g standar d resistance training, the eccentric
force exerted by the muscle keeps the weight from being
accelerated downward by gravitational force. Thus, the weight
moves steadi ly down ward rather than picking up speed and
contacting the floor or the athlete’ s body .
In an isometric muscle action , the muscle length does not
change, because the contractile force is equal to the resistiv e
force. The forces gener ated within the muscle and acting to
shorten it are equal to the external forces acting at its tendons
to stretch it. During a sit-up with the trunk held straight, the
abdominal muscles act isometrical ly to maintain the rigidity of
the trunk, while the hip flexors carry out the sit-up movement.
144
In contrast, the abdominal muscles act concentrical ly and
eccentrical ly during the raising and lowering phases of the
curl-up ex ercise, r espectiv ely.
FIGURE 2.13  Force–velocity curv e for eccentric and concentric actions.
Reprinted from K. Jorgensen, “Force-Velocity Relationship in Human Elbow Flexors and Extensors,” in Biomechanics A-
V, edited by P.V. Komi, (University Park Press, 1976), 147. By permission of P.V. Komi.
Muscle torque varies with joint angular velocity according to the
type of muscular action (figure 2.13). Tests have shown that during
isokinetic (constant -speed) concentric exercise by human subjects,
torque capabi lity declines as angular velocity increases. In contrast,
during eccentric exercise, as joint angular velocity increases,
maximal torque capabi lity increases until about 90 degrees per
second (1.57 rad/s), after which it declines gradual ly (6). That
means that the greatest muscle force can be obtained during
eccentric muscle action. This is demonstr ated by athletes who
emplo y “cheating” movements when a weight cannot be lifted using
strict form. For example, an individual who reaches a sticking
point  in the biceps curl exercise due to the limit of concentric elbow
flexor strength  usually leans the torso back, allowing the elbow
flexors to exert increased force by operating isometrical ly or
eccentrical ly and thereby enabl ing continued movement of the bar.
This sticking point is r epresented b y a decr ease in ac celeration.
145
Strength-to-Mass Ratio
In sport activities such as sprinting and jumping, the ratio of the
strength of the muscles involved in the movement to the mass of the
body parts being accelerated is critical. Thus, the strength-to-mass
ratio directly reflects an athlete’ s ability to accelerate his or her body.
If, after training, an athlete increases body mass by 15% but
increases force capabi lity by only 10%, the strength-to-mass ratio,
and thus the athlete’ s ability to accelerate, is reduced. A sprinter or
jumper may benefi t by experimenting with muscle mass to
determine the highest strength-to-mass ratio, which would result in
the best possible perf ormance.
In sports involving weight classification, the strength-to-mass
ratio is extremely important . If all competi tors have close to the
same body mass, the strongest one has a decided advantage. It is
normal for the strength-to-m ass ratio of larger athletes to be lower
than that of smaller athletes because when body size increases,
muscle volume (and concomitantly body weight) increases
proportionately more than does muscle cross-sectional area (and
concomi tantly strength) (12). Trial and error can help athletes
determine the weight category in which their strength is highest
relative to that of other athletes in the weight class. Once an athlete
finds his or her most competi tive weight class, the object is to
become as strong as possib le without exceeding the class weight
limit.
Body Size
It has long been observ ed that, all else being equal, smaller athletes
are stronger pound for pound than larger athletes (12). The reason
is that a muscl e’s maximal contractile force is fairly proportional to its
cross-sectional area, which is related to the squar e (second power)
of linear body dimensions, whereas a muscle’ s mass is proportional
to its volume, which is related to the cube (third power) of linear
body dimensions. Therefore, as body size increases, body mass
increases more rapidly than does muscular strength. Given constant
146
body proportions, the smaller athlete has a higher strength-to-mass
ratio than does the lar ger athlete (12).
There has always been interest in comparing the performances of
athletes in different weight categories. The most obvious method for
doing so is to divide the weight lifted by the athlete’ s body weight.
Howev er, such an adjustment is biased against larger athletes
because it does not consider the expected drop in the strength-to-
mass ratio with increasing body size. Various formulas have been
derived to more equitably compar e loads lifted. In the classic
formula , the load lifted is divided by body weight to the two-thir ds
power , thus accounting for the relationship of cross-sectional area
versus volume. Other formulas have since been developed because
the classic formula seemed to favor athletes of middle body weight
over lighter and heavier athletes (7). Howev er, the determination by
the classic formula that the performances of medium- weight athletes
are usually the best may indeed be unbiased. Because of the bell-
shaped curve describing the normal distribution of anthropometric
characteristics among the population, the body weights of a majori ty
of people ar e cluster ed close to the mean.
In sport activities such as sprinting and jumping, the
ratio of the strength of the muscles involved in the
movement to the mass of the body parts being
accelerated is critical. Thus, the strength-to-mass ratio
directly reflects an athlete’s ability to accelerate his or
her body.
147
Sources of Resistance to Muscle
Contraction
The most common sources of resistance for strength training
exercises are gravity, inertia , friction, fluid resistance, and
elasticity . This section provides information on how we overcome
these forms of resistance during acts of daily living, exercise, and
sport. An understanding of the principles behind exercise devices
using the various forms of resistance can provide insight into their
effectiveness and appl icability.
What Goes Up Must Come Down: Gravity
and Vertical Jum p Performance
In sport, athletes launch themselv es into the air. Jump height depends on takeoff
vertical velocity (TOV). To jump higher , athletes must leave the ground faster
because it takes gravity longer to reduce velocity to 0. Calculate jump height by
squaring TOV and dividing it by two times gravity. To jump 0.55 meters requires a
TOV of 3.285 m ∙ s−1. If calculating the TOV needed to jump a certain height, first
multiply the new jump height by two times gravity before calculating its squar e
root: 0.55 × 2 × gr avity = 3.285 m ∙ s−1.
Gravity
The downward force on an object from the pull of gravity , the
interaction of mass and gravity, is equal to the object ’s mass times
the local ac celeration due to gr avity:
  Fg = m × ag    (2.8)
where Fg is the force due to gravity (same as the object ’s weight,
measur ed in newtons [N]), m is the object ’s mass (measur ed in
kilograms [kg]), and ag is the local acceleration due to gravity
(measur ed in meters per second per second [m·s−2]). The
acceleration due to gravity can vary by geogr aphic location.
Weighing a barbel l on a calibrated spring or electr onic scale shows
148
its actual weight. A balance scale determines only the object ’s mass,
so its weight (Fg) must be calculated using equation 2.8 if a spring or
electr onic scale is not a vailable.
Popular terminology for weight  and mass is often incorr ect and
used interchangeably with correct terminology . As explain ed earlier,
the correct measur ement unit for mass, which describe s the load
presented to us by, for example, barbel ls and dumbbel ls, is the
kilogram (kg). Therefore, a barbell loaded to 85 kilograms should be
referred to as “the barbel l has a mass of 85 kilograms” or “the
barbel l is 60 kilograms” without referring to weight. Use of pounds
as a measur ement unit of mass is incorr ect because it is a
measur ement unit once used for force. Howev er, we know that the
correct measur ement unit for both weight and force is the newton
and that this describes the interaction of mass and gravity (table 2.1,
page 37). While the weight of the 85-kilogram barbel l on planet
Earth is 833.85 newtons, on the moon its weight would  be 137.7
newtons, making it feel more like 14 kilograms, even though it did
not ph ysical ly change.
Applications to Resistance Training
The gravitational force on an object always acts down ward. Since,
by defini tion, the moment arm by which a force produce s torque is
perpendicular to the line of action of the force, the momen t arm of a
weight is always horizontal. Thus, torque due to an object ’s weight is
the product of the weight and the length from the weight to the axis
of rotation (joint). During an exercise, although the weight does not
change, the length between the weight and a given joint axis can
change constantly . When the weight is horizontally closer to the
joint, it exerts less resistiv e torque; when it is horizontally farther
from a joint, it exerts more resistiv e torque. For example, in the
biceps curl, the length element is greatest when the forearm is
horizontal. Thus, in that position the athlete must exert the greatest
muscle torque to support the weight. The moment arm decreases as
the forearm rotates either upward or down ward away from the
149
horizontal position, decreasing the resistiv e torque arising from the
weight (figure 2.7, page 31). When  the weight is directly above or
below the elbow axis of rotation, there is no resistiv e torque from
the weight.
Exercise technique can affect the resistiv e torque pattern during
an exercise and can shift stress among muscle groups. In the back
squat, for example, a more forward inclination of the trunk brings
the weight horizontally closer to the knees, thus reducing the
resistiv e torque about the knees that the quadriceps must
counter act. At the same time, the weight is horizontally farther from
the hip, increasing the resistiv e torque about the hip that the gluteus
and hamstring  muscles must counter act. This resistive torque
pattern is most often present when the barbel l is positioned as low
as possible on the upper back (often termed a low bar squat ); the
athlete must incline the trunk relatively far forward to keep the
center of mass of body plus bar over the feet, thereby avoiding a
fall. Because the bar is then horizontally far from the hip and close
to the knee, stress is focused  on the hip extensors and, to a lesser
extent, on the knee extensors. The opposi te of this resistiv e torque
pattern would occur in a high bar squat, in which the bar is placed
higher up on the back closer to the neck. As a result of this bar
positioning, the torque distribution increases the resistive torque
about the knees and concomi tantly reduces the resistiv e torque
about the hip (in contr ast to what oc curs wi th the low bar squat).
Exercise technique can affect the resistive torque
pattern during an exercise and can shift stress among
muscle groups.
Weight-Stack Machines
As with free weights, gravity is the source of resistance for weight -
stack machine s. Howev er, by means of pulleys, cams,  cables, and
gears, these machines provide increased control over the direction
and pattern of resistance. Both free weights and stack machines
150
have advantages and disadv antages. The following are some of the
advantages of the stack machine:
Safety. The likelihood  of injury as a result of being hit by,
tripping over, or being trapped under a weight is reduced. Less
skill is required to maintain control of a weight stack than a
free weight.
Design flexibi lity. Machines can be designed to provide
resistance to body movemen ts that are difficult to resist with
free weights (e.g., lat pulldown, hip adduction and abduction,
leg curl). To some extent, the pattern of resistance can be
engineer ed into a machine.
Ease of use. Many people  who fear that they lack the
coordination or technique to safely lift free weights feel
confident when using machines. Also, it is quicker and easier
to select a weight by inserting a pin in a stack than by
mounting plates on a bar .
Advantages of f ree weights include the f ollowing:
Total body training.  Free weight exercises are often performed
in the standing position with the weight supported by the
entire body, taxing a larger portion of the body’s musculatur e
and skeleton than a weight -stack machine would. Such
weight -bearing exercise promotes greater bone miner alization,
helping to prevent osteopor osis in later life (18). Moreover, the
movement of a free weight is constr ained by the athlete rather
than by a machine, requiring muscles to work in stabilization
as well as support. A structural exercise , such as the power
clean or the snatch, is particularly useful in providing training
stimulus f or a major portion of the body ’s musculatur e.
Simulation of real-life activities. The lifting and acceleration of
objects represent a major part of sport and other physical ly
demanding activities. Machin es tend to isolate single muscle
groups; the lifting of free weights involves the more natural
coordination of sev eral muscle gr oups.
151
Nautilus Sport s/Medical Industries populariz ed the concept of
tailoring resistive torque through the range of joint motion by
creating an exercise machine  that uses a cam of variable radius; this
changes the length of the moment arm through which the weight
stack acts (figure 2.14). The rationale was to provide more
resistance at points in the range of motion where the muscles could
exert greater torque, and less resistance where the muscles could
apply less torque. For the system to work as planned, howev er, the
athlete has to move at a constant, slow angular velocity, which is
difficult to do consistently . Also, cam-based machines frequently fail
to match normal human tor que capabi lity patterns (12).
152
FIGURE 2.14 In cam-based weight -stack machines, the moment arm (M) of the weight
stack (length between the chain and the cam axis of rotation) varies during the exercise
movement. When the cam is rotated in the direction shown from position 1 to position 2,
the moment arm of the weights, and thus the r esistiv e torque, incr eases.
Inertia
In addition to gravitational force, a barbel l or weight stack, when
accelerated, exerts inertial force  on the athlete. Though the force
of gravity acts only down ward, inertial force can act in any direction.
The upward force an athlete exerts equals the weight lifted plus any
inertial force, which is the mass times the upward acceleration of the
bar. Horizontal bar acceleration occurs if the athlete exerts net force
153
on the bar directed to the front, back, left, or right. All exercises
involve some acceleration at the beginning to bring the bar from a
zero to an upward velocity, as well as some deceler ation near the
top of the exercise to bring the bar’s velocity back to zero so that it
does not continue its trajectory and fly out of the athlete’ s hands .
With this acceleration pattern, the agonist muscles receive resistance
in excess of bar weight early in the range of motion but resistance
less than bar weight toward the end of the range of motion (37).
The athlete deceler ates the bar by either reducing upward force on
the bar to less than bar weight to let some or all of the bar’s weight
deceler ate it or pushing down against the bar using the antagonist
muscles. In either case, the deceler ation has the effect of providing
less resistance to the agonist muscles late in the r ange of motion.
Compar ed to a slow exercise with minimal acceleration of a given
weight, an exercise involving higher acceleration (an “explosiv e”
exercise) provides greater resistance to the muscles involved early in
the range of motion and less resistance to the muscles involved
toward the end of the range of motion. Howev er, because of the
addition of inertia, heavier weights can be handled in accelerative
exercises than in slow exercises, providing near-maximal resistance
for all muscles involved in the exercise. During a power clean of a
heavy weight, for example, the strong leg, hip, and back muscles
accelerate the bar vertical ly to a high enough velocity that, even
though the weaker upper body muscles cannot apply the vertical
force necessary to accelerate the bar’s weight, the bar’s momentum
(achiev ed by applying the necessary force over the available time)
means that it continues to travel upward, the force of gravity having
to work for longer to deceler ate it to zero velocity at the highest bar
position.
Although acceleration changes the nature of an exercise and
makes resistan ce patterns less predictable, acceleration in resistance
training is not necessari ly undesir able. Because acceleration is
characteristic of natural movements in sport and daily life, resistance
training exercises involving acceleration probably produce desirable
154
neuromuscular training effects. Weightl ifting exercises such as the
snatch and the clean and jerk are effective for improving the ability
to produce high ac celerations against hea vy resistance (32).
Acceleration and deceler ation are characteristic of virtually all
natural movements. For example, sprinting requires the athlete’ s
arms and legs to go through repeated cycles of acceleration and
deceler ation. Throwing a baseball, discus, shot, or javelin all involve
sequences of body movements that accelerate the objects to high
release speeds. Because acceleration is a particular kind of
movement pattern, training with accelerative movements can
provide specificity of training. That is why explosiv e exercises, such
as the power clean and high pull, are used in training for many
different sports in which the leg and hip muscles provide force for
accelerating the body. The bracketing technique , in which the
athlete performs the sport movement with less than normal and
greater than normal resistance, is another form of acceleration
training. According to the force–velocity relationship of muscle, a
shot-putter who trains with an extra-hea vy shot develops greater
forces during the accelerative movement than when using the
normal shot because the inertia of the heavier implement forces the
muscle to contract at relatively low velocity. When a relatively light
shot is used, the lower inertia of the shot enables the putter to
accelerate the shot more rapidly and to reach a highe r speed of
release, thereby training the neuromuscular system to operate within
desired acceleration and velocity ranges. Although the principle of
increasing or decreasing the load during a movement as described
has the theoretical basis for increasing acceleration capaci ty through
the aforementioned methods, one should also consider the influence
that such changes in loading have during highly specific or
technique-oriented activities such as throwing or sprinting. For
example, changing implement loading could have some negativ e
consequences on technique since the body needs time to adjust the
motor pat tern f or that particular mo vement wi th the new load.
155
Overcoming Friction: The Impact of Load
on Static and Dynamic Friction
Friction is essential for movement control and provides resistance in sled-based
training for horizontal pushing and pulling. Resear chers measur ed the horizontal
force needed to overcome static (μs) and dynamic (μd) friction for sled loads of
44.8, 90, and 136.2 kilograms (98.8, 198.4, 300.3 lb) (3). They found mean forces
to overcome  μs were 206, 374, and 514 N, calculating  μs (horiz ontal force ÷ sled
load, mass × g) as 0.47, 0.42, and 0.39. For μd, forces were 154, 289, and 415
newtons, calculating  μd as 0.35, 0.33, and 0.31. Knowing  μs and μd enables us to
calculate the force needed to start and maintain sled movement; this is analogous
to barbell mass in traditional resistanc e exercise. These ratios depend on the load
and surf ace condi tions.
Friction
Friction  is the force that resists sliding and is encounter ed when
one attempts to move an object whose surface is pressed against
the surface of another object. Exercise devices that use friction as
the main source of resistan ce include belt- or brake pad–resisted
cycle ergometers and wrist curl devices, but an element of friction
exists and contributes to exercise load from weight stack machines.
For such devices,
  FR = k × FN    (2.9)
where FR is the resistiv e force; k is the coefficient of friction for the
two contact surfaces; and FN is the normal force, which presses the
objects against each other (perpendicular to desired movement
direction).
The coefficients of friction for initiating and for maintaining
movement are different. All else being equal, it takes more force to
initiate movement between two surfaces in contact than to maintain
previously initiated movement. Thus, a friction-r esiste d exercise
device requires a relatively high force to initiate movement and a
relatively constant force after movement has begun, no matter what
the movement speed. Resistance provided by such devices is
156
sometimes adjusted through a mechanism that alters the normal
force that k eeps the f riction surf aces in contact wi th each other .
A weighted sled used in training for footbal l or track is an example
of a device that is resisted by both friction and inertia. The
resistance due to the sled’s inertia is directly proportional to both the
sled’s mass and its acceleration. The resistance due to the friction
between the sled’s runners and the ground is proportional to both
the friction coefficient betwee n surfaces in contact and the net force
(which is the normal force in this example) pressing the sled against
the ground, which equals the gravitational force minus any upward
force exerted by the individu al pushing the sled. Mass can be added
to the sled to increase the gravitational force. The friction coefficient
varies with the surface on which the sled rests (e.g., sand, bare soil,
dry grass, wet grass) and the sled’s runners. Thus, for outdoor
training, such devices do not provide consistently repeatable
resistance. They are nevertheless useful in providing horizontal
resistance, which cannot be directly provided by weights. It takes
more force to get the sled moving than to keep it moving, because
the coefficient of static friction is always greater than the coefficient
of sliding friction. Once the sled is moving, the coefficient of sliding
friction stays relatively constant. Therefore, one should understand
that if velocity is kept relatively consistent during sled pulling and
pushing, friction resistance will be relatively consistent too. This will
be dictated by a combination of the athlete’ s capaci ty to apply
consistent impulse (F × t) at the foot–ground interface and maintain
postur e sufficient to ef fectively transfer this to the sled.
Fluid Resistance
The resistiv e force encounter ed by an object moving through a fluid
(liquid or gas), or by a fluid moving past or around an object or
through an opening, is called fluid resistan ce. Fluid resistance is a
significant factor in such sport activities as swimming, rowing, golf,
sprinting, discus throwing, and basebal l pitching. (Except for
swimming and rowing, in which the fluid is water, all these involve
157
air resistance .) The phenomenon has become important in
resistance training with the advent of hydraulic (liquid) and
pneumatic (gas) exercise machines and with the increasing
populari ty of swimming pool exercise routines, particularly among
older people and pregnant  women. The two sources of fluid
resistance are surface drag, which results from the friction of a
fluid passing along the surface of an object, and form drag, which
results from the way in which a fluid presses against the front or
rear of an object passing through it. Cross-sectional (frontal) area
has a major ef fect on f orm dr ag.
Fluid-r esisted exercise machines most often use cylinders in which
a piston forces fluid through an opening as the exercise movement is
performed. The resistiv e force is greater when the piston is pushed
faster, when the opening is smaller, or when the fluid is more
viscous. All else being equal, resistance is roughly proportional to the
velocity of piston mo vement:
  FR = k × v    (2.10)
where FR is the resistiv e force; k is a constant that reflects the
physical characteristics of the cylinder and piston, the viscosi ty of the
fluid, and the number , size, and shape of the openings; and v is
piston v elocity relative to the cyl inder.
Because fluid cylinders provide resistance that increases with
velocity, they allow an initial rapid acceleration that decreases at
higher velocities. Movement velocity is thus kept within an
intermediate range. Although such machines limit changes in velocity
to a certain extent, they are not isokinetic (constant velocity) as is
sometimes claimed. Some machines have adjustment knobs that
enable the opening size to be changed. A larger opening enables the
user to reach a higher movement velocity before the fluid-r esistiv e
force curtai ls the abi lity to ac celerate.
Fluid-r esisted machines do not gener ally provide an eccentric
exercise phase , but they may if they incorpor ate an internal pump .
With a free weight, the agonist muscle group acts concentrical ly
158
while raising the weight and eccentrical ly while lowering it. With
fluid-r esisted machines without eccentric resistance, a muscle group
acts concentrical ly during performance of the primary exercise
movement, and the antago nist muscle group acts concentrical ly
during the return to the starting position. In other words, whereas
free weights or weight machines involve alternate concentric and
eccentric actions of the same muscle with little or no rest in
between, fluid-r esisted machines gener ally involve alternate
concentric actions of antagonistic muscle groups; each muscle group
rests while its antagonist works. The lack of an eccentric muscle
action with fluid-r esisted machines means that such exercise
probably does not provide optimal specificity of training for the many
sport movements that involve eccentric muscle actions (e.g.,
running, jumping, and thr owing).
Elasticity
A numb er of exercise devices, particularly those designed  for home
use, have elastic components  such as springs, bands, bows, or rods
as their source of resistance. The resistance provided by a standar d
elastic component is pr oportional to the distance i t is str etched:
  FR = k × x    (2.11)
where FR is the resistiv e force, k is a constant that reflects the
physical characteristics of the elastic component, and x is the length
that the elastic component is str etched to bey ond its resting length.
The most obvious characteri stic of elastic resistance is that the
more the elastic component is stretched, the greater the resistance.
The problem with devices using elastic resistance is that every
exercise movement begins with low resistance and ends with high
resistance. This is contrary to the force capabi lity patterns of virtual ly
all human muscle groups, which show a substantial drop-off in force
capabi lity toward the end of the range of motion. Anoth er problem
with elastici ty-resisted machines is that the adjustabi lity of resistance
is usually limited by the number of elastic components available to
159
provide resistance to a movement. An effective resistance exercise
device should incorpor ate enough variation in resistiv e force that the
number of repetitions the athlete can perform is kept within a
desirable r ange.
Certain products provide resistance to vertical jumping with elastic
bands as a means of developing jumping power . Howev er, the elastic
bands provide little resistance early in the jump when the large
gluteal and quadriceps muscles are capable of exerting great force.
The bands provide the greatest resistance while the jumper is in the
air—serving mainly to pull the jumper back to the ground, rather
than resist the muscles, and so increasing the jumper ’s landing
velocity, which ma y incr ease injury risk.
160
Joint Biomechanics: Concerns in
Resistance Training
As with any physical activity, resistance training involves a degree of
risk. Howev er, the risks involved are gener ally lower than for many
other sport and physical condi tioning activities (48, 49). Rates of
injury are the highest for team sports; intermediate for running and
aerobics; and lowest for cycling, walking, and resistance training, the
latter of which  has about 4 injuries per 1,000 hours of participation.
A study of collegiate American footbal l players showed  only 0.35
resistance training–r elated injuries per 100 players per season.
Injuries due to resistance training accounted for only 0.74% of the
in-season injury-related time loss of the players (61). Despi te the
relatively low risk of resistance training, it is desirable to minimiz e
the likelihood of injury through prudent risk management. The
following are several factors to consider in avoiding resistance
training injuries, with particular attention given to the back,
shoulders, and knees.
The risk of injury from resistance training is low
compared to that of other sport and physical
conditioning activities.
Back
In contrast to quadrupeds, whose vertebr al columns hang like the
cables on a suspension bridge, humans normal ly stand upright, with
the vertebral bones stacked one on top of another , separ ated by
rubbery disks. The advantage  we gain from our upright postur e and
free use of the arms and hands is accompanied by the disadv antage
of having our interv ertebr al disks under compr essive force even
when we are merely standing, sitting, walking, or running— and
under even more compr essive force when we are lifting and carrying
(19). When we are in a standing position, any force we exert with
161
the upper body must be transmitted through the back to the legs
and ground. In addition, the back muscles act at a great mechanical
disadv antage and must gener ate forces much greater than the
weight of an object lifted. It is for these reasons that the back is
particularly vulner able to injury. It should be noted, howev er, that
spinal internal loads are quite variable with different postur es during
the movement (31) and that deep squat ting positions with load are
not necessari ly associated wi th back injury (22).
Back Injury
Back injury can be extremely  debilitating, persistent, and difficult to
remedy . Thus, every effort should be made to avoid back injury
during resistance training. The lower back is particularly vulner able.
It has been observ ed that 85% to 90% of all interv ertebr al disk
herniations occur at the disk between the lowest two lumbar
vertebr ae (L4 and L5) or between the lowest lumbar and the top
sacral vertebr a (L5 and S1) (1, 4). This is not surprising, given the
extremely high compr essive forces on the disks during lifting. When
a weight is supported in the hands or on the shoulders and the trunk
is inclined forward, there is great torque about the lower
interv ertebr al disks due to the large perpendicular distance between
the lower back and the weight. The back muscles operate at an
extremely low mechanical advantage because the perpendicular
distance from the line of action of the spinal erector muscles to the
interv ertebr al disks is much shorter (about 5 cm, or 2 in) than the
perpendicular distance from the weight to the disks. As a result, the
muscles must exert forces that frequently exceed 10 times the
weight lifted (4). These forces act to squeez e the interv ertebr al disks
between the adjacent v ertebr al bodies and can lead to injury .
The neutral-back lifting postur e has been found to be better
overall than a rounded (opposite of arched) back in minimizing
L5/S1 compr essive forces and ligament strain (2). Therefore, a
normal lordotic  lumbar spine position is superior to a rounded back
for avoiding injury to vertebr ae, disks, facet joints, ligaments, and
162
muscles of the back. In addition, the low back muscles are capable
of exerting consider ably higher forces when the back is arched
rather than r ounded (9).
The vertebral column  is naturally S-shaped, being slightly
rounded (kyphotic ) in the thoracic spine and lordotic in the lumbar
spine. The wedge shape of the vertebr ae gives the spine its natural
curve. Howev er, the interv ertebr al disks are flat when the back is in
its S shape. When the lower  back is rounded, the ventral  (toward
the anterior) edges of the vertebr al bodies squeez e the front
portions of the interv ertebr al disks. In contrast, extreme arching of
the back results in squeezing the dorsal  (toward the posterior)
portions of the disks. Such uneven squeezing of the intervertebr al
disks likely increases the risk of disk ruptur e (4). Thus,  resistance
training exercises should gener ally be performed with the lower back
in a moder ately arched position to reduce risk of damage to the
disks.
Intra-Abdominal Pressure and Lifting Belts
When the diaphr agm and the deep muscles of the torso contract,
pressure is gener ated within the abdominal cavity. Because the
abdomen is composed mainly of fluid and normal ly contains very
little gas, it is virtual ly incom pressible (4). The abdominal fluids and
tissue kept under pressure by tensing surrounding muscle (deep
abdominal muscles and diaphr agm) have been described as a fluid
ball (figure 2.15) that aids in supporting the vertebr al column during
resistance training (4). Such support may significantly reduce both
the forces required by the erector spinae muscles to perform an
exercise and the associated compr essive forces on the disks (4 , 40).
163
FIGURE 2.15 The fluid ball resulting from contraction of the deep abdominal muscles
and the diaphr agm.
It is importan t to note that the Valsalva maneuver  is not
necessary for gener ation of intra-abdominal pressure. In the Valsalv a
maneuv er, the glottis is closed, thus keeping air from escaping the
lungs, and the muscles of the abdomen and rib cage contract,
creating rigid compartments of liquid in the lower torso and air in the
upper torso. An advantage of the Valsalv a maneuv er is that it
increases the rigidity of the entire torso, making it easier to support
heavy loads (20). For examp le, when lifting heavy loads in the back
squat exercise, many athletes use the Valsalv a maneuv er, particularly
when the trunk is most inclined forward, near the transition from the
eccentric movement phase to the concentric movement phase.
Howev er, pressure in the chest associated with the Valsalv a
164
maneuv er can have the undesir able side effect of exerting
compr essive force on the heart, making it more difficult for blood to
return to the heart. Also, the Valsalv a maneuv er can transiently raise
blood pressure to slightly elevated levels (20). The diaphr agm and
the abdominal muscles can contract without the glottis being closed,
howev er, creating the fluid ball in the abdomen without pressurizing
the chest compartment. This must be regarded as the safer way, of
the two options, to add support to the lower spine without building
up pressure in the chest, and it is the technique that should be used
for most resistance training. One can build up intra-abdominal
pressure without building up chest pressure by consciously keeping
the airway open. During a strenuous repetition, the abdominal
muscles and diaphr agm contract reflexiv ely, even with the airway
open. Athletes, particularly those who compete in weightl ifting or
powerl ifting, may choose to use the Valsalv a maneuv er if they
recogniz e and accept the risks involved and have the experience to
avoid incr easing pr essure to the point of black out.
Weightl ifting belts have been shown to increase intra-abdominal
pressure during resistance training and are therefore probably
effective in improving safety when used correctly (21, 38, 62). It has
been cautioned, howev er, that if an athlete performs all of the
exercises with a belt, the abdomina l muscles that produce intra-
abdominal pressure might not get enough training stimulus to
develop optimal ly (21). It is particularly risky for an individual who
has become accustomed to wearing a belt to suddenly perform an
exercise without one, because the abdominal musculatur e might not
be capable of gener ating enough intra-abdominal pressure to
significantly reduce erector spinae muscle forces. The resulting
excessiv e comp ressive forces on the disks could increase the chance
of back injury . Conserv ative recommendations ar e as f ollows:
A weigh t belt is not needed for exercises that do not directly
affect the lower back.
For exercises directly stressing the back, an individual should
refrain from wearing a belt during lighter sets but may wear
165
one for near-maximal and maximal sets. The beltless sets
allow the deep abdominal muscles, which gener ate intra-
abdominal pressure, to receive a training stimulus without
placing excessiv e compr essive forces on the interv ertebr al
disks.
Individuals may reasonably choose never to wear lifting belts if
they build up the strength of their back muscles and the
muscles that gener ate intra-abdominal pressure in a gradual
and systematic manner and if they practice safe resistance
training exercise techniques. Many world-class weightl ifters
never wear bel ts.
Shoulders
The shoulder is particularly prone to injury during resistance training,
due to both its structur e and the forces to which it is subjected
during a training session. Like the hip, the shoulder is capable of
rotating in any direction. The hip is a stable ball-and-sock et joint, but
the glenoid cavity of the shoulder , which holds the head of the
humerus, is not a true socket and is significantly less stable. The
shoulder joint has the greatest range of motion of all the joints in
the human body, but the joint’s excessiv e mobility contrib utes to its
vulner ability, as does the proximity of the bones, muscles, tendons,
ligaments, and bursae in the shoulder .
The stability of the shoulder largely depends on the glenoid
labrum; the joint synovium; and capsules, ligaments , muscles,
tendons, and bursae. The rotator cuff muscles (supraspinatus,
infraspinatus, subscapularis, and teres minor) and the pector als are
particularly instrumental in keeping the ball of the humerus in place.
With the shoulder ’s great range of motion, its various structur es can
easily impinge  on one another , causing tendini tis as well as
inflammation and degener ation of contiguous tissue. High forces
gener ated during resistance training can result in tearing of
ligaments, muscles, and tendons. Athletes must take particular care
when performing the various forms of the bench and shoulder press
166
exercises because of the great stresses placed on the shoulder . For
these exercises, it is particularly important to warm up with relatively
light weights and to follow a program that exercises the shoulder in
a balanced w ay, using al l of its major mo vements.
Knees
The knee is prone to injury because of its location between two long
levers (the upper and lower leg). Flexion and extension about the
knee occur almost exclusiv ely in the sagittal plane. Rotation in the
frontal plane and transverse plane is prevented mainly by
ligamentous and cartilaginou s stabilizing structur es. Frontal plane
torque on the knee occurs, for example, when a footbal l player is hit
at midleg from the side while the foot is planted firmly on the
ground. Fortunately , in training, resistiv e torques occur almost
exclusiv ely wi thin the knee’ s normal plane of r otation.
Of the various components of the knee, the patella and
surrounding tissue are most susceptible to the kinds of forces
encounter ed in resistance training. The patella’s main function is to
hold the quadriceps tendon away from the knee axis of rotation,
thereby increasing the mome nt arm of the quadriceps group and its
mechanical advantage (figure 2.5, page 30). If inappr opriate load,
volume, or recovery is introduced, repetitive high forces encounter ed
by the patellar tendon during  resistance training (as with any high-
force activity such as running) can lead to tendini tis, which is
characteriz ed by tenderness and swelling. There is no inherent risk
of tendini tis with performing these exercises; rather, tendini tis is
simply a function of too much volume and intensi ty without
appropriate pr ogression.
It is not unusu al for individuals to use knee wraps during  training
or competi tion in order to assist with maximizing performance or
preventing injury. Wraps vary from the thin, elastic, pull-on variety
that can be purchased in drug stores to the heavy, special ized wraps
sold only through weightl ifting supply houses. The use of knee
wraps, particularly the heavy ones, is most prevalent among
167
powerl ifters. Very little resear ch has been done on the efficacy of
knee wraps. Detrimental side effects have been reported, howev er,
including skin damage and chondr omalacia patellae, the wearing
down and roughening of the posterior surface of the patella (36).
Through a spring effect alone , heavy wraps around the knees added
an average of 25 pounds (110 N) to squat lifting force. The notion
that wraps work only by stabilizing the knee, lessening the athlete’ s
fear of injury , or providing a kinesth etic cue is incorr ect (36). The
wraps actually provide direct help in extending the knee. On the
basis of the lack of evidence that knee wraps prevent injury , athletes
should minimiz e their use. If used at all, knee wraps should be
limited to the sets wi th the hea viest loads.
Elbows and Wrists
The primary concerns with elbow and wrist injury involve overhead
exercises (10, 57). Howev er, the risk with overhead lifting is quite
small in comparison to the common source of injury of these joints,
which includes participation in overhead sports such as throwing
events or the tennis serve (10, 57). Other examples of possible
injury are elbow dislocation, sometimes observ ed in gymnastics (39),
and overuse-r elated injuries such as traction apoph ysitis, sometimes
observ ed in diving, wrestling, and hockey (39). One of the primary
concerns is epiph yseal growth plate damage or overuse either in the
posterior aspec t of the elbow  or in the distal radius in young athletes
(39). The prevalence of elbow or wrist injury with weightlifting is
very sporadic and often referred to in the literature only through
case studies. One study indicated a triceps tendon tear in a middle-
aged competi tive weightl ifter (47) and in another study, a bilateral
distal biceps tendon ruptur e in a recreational weight trainer (50). A
study examining 245 compe titive powerl ifters found an extremely
low incidence of elbow and wrist injury (52). Only very limited data
have been presented to suggest possible distal radial epiph ysis
fracture in adolescent weigh tlifters (11, 29). According to a study
that surveyed 500 experts in the field of sports medicine, most
168
respondents indicated that avoiding resistance training before
physeal closur e was not necessary (43).
169
Conclusion
It is hoped that readers will apply the biomechanical principles
discussed in this chapter to the selection of resistance exercise
equipment and the design of exercise programs. Knowledge of how
different types of exercise provide specific patterns of resistance to
the body can aid in developing safe and effective programs to suit
the specific needs of athletes engaged in various sports and others
who engage in resistance training for enhancement of physical
performance, heal th, sense of wel l-being, and sel f-confidence.
KEY TERMS
acceleration
agonist
anatomical posi tion
angle of pennation
angular displacement
angular v elocity
antagonist
biomechanics
bracketing technique
cartilaginous joint
classic f ormula
concentric muscle action
displacement
distal
dorsal
eccentric muscle action
elastici ty
fibrous at tachments
first-class lev er
fleshy attachments
fluid bal l
170
fluid r esistance
force
form dr ag
friction
frontal plane
fulcrum
gravity
impulse
inertia
inertial f orce
insertion
isometric muscle action
kinetic ener gy
kyphotic
lever
lordotic
mass
mechanical adv antage
mechanical ener gy
moment
moment arm
momentum
muscle f orce
origin
peak power
pennate muscle
potential ener gy
power
proximal
rate coding
recruitment
resistiv e force
sagittal plane
scalar
171
second-class lev er
sticking point
strength
structur al exercise
surface dr ag
syner gist
tendons
third-class lev er
titin
torque
transverse plane
Valsalv a maneuv er
vector
velocity
ventral
vertebr al column
work
STUDY QUESTIONS
  1.  Gr avity on the surface of the moon is approximately 1/6 that
on the surface of the earth.  Considering a kettlebel l, labeled
30 kilograms (66 lb), what would using the kettlebel l feel like
(appr oximately) on the surf ace of the moon?
  a.  5 kg (11 lb)
  b.  15 kg (33 lb)
  c.  30 kg (66 lb)
  d.  180 kg (397 lb)
  2.  In sliding-fi lament theory , what is the third contractile element
used in muscle contr action?
  a.  m yosin
  b.  actin
  c.  titin
  d.  sar comer e
172
  3.  What class of lever is the lead forearm in a basebal l pitch at
ball release?
  a.  first -class lev er
  b.  second-class lev er
  c.  thir d-class lev er
  d.  fourth-class lev er
  4.  For a system- wide view of an athlete, which of the following
aspects of fi tness and perf ormance is the most r elevant?
  a.  impulse
  b.  peak f orce
  c.  mean f orce
  d.  rate of f orce dev elopment
  5.  A sidestepping (cutting) movement involves ankle, knee, and
hip movement primari ly in which of the following anatomical
planes?
  a.  sagi ttal
  b.  perpendicular
  c.  frontal
  d.  tr ansverse
173