# Section 2.2

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 2: Biomechanics of Resistance Exercise

**Section:** 2.2 -- Anatomical Planes and Movements

**PDF Pages:** 114--125

FIGURE 2.5 Mechanical advantage at the knee.  (a) The patella increases the mechanical
advantage of the quadriceps muscle group by maintaining the quadriceps tendon’ s distance
from the knee’s axis of rotation.  (b) Absence of the patella allows the tendon to fall closer
114
to the knee’s cente r of rotation, shortening the moment arm through which the muscle
force acts and ther eby reducing the muscle’ s mechanical adv antage.
Reprinted by permission from B.A. Gowitzke and M. Milner, Scientific Bases of Human Movement (Williams &
Wilkins,1988), 17.
For movements such as knee extension and flexion, where the
joint is not a true hinge, the location of the axis of rotation
changes continuously throughout the range of motion,
affecting the length of the moment arm through which the
quadriceps and hamstrings  act. For knee extension, the
patella, or kneecap , helps to prevent large changes in the
mechanical advantage of the quadriceps muscle by keeping
the quadriceps  tendon from falling in close to the axis of
rotation ( figure 2.5; 17).
For movement s such as elbow extension and flexion, there is
no structure such as the patella to keep the perpendi cular
distance from the joint axis of rotation to the tendon’ s line of
action r elatively constant ( figure 2.6).
During resistance training with free weights, the moment arm
through which the weight acts equals the horizontal distance
from a line through the center of mass of the barbe ll or
dumbbel l to the body joint about which rotation of the limb
occurs; the resistiv e moment arm thus varies throughout the
movement ( figure 2.7).
115
FIGURE 2.6 Mechanical advantage at the elbow . During elbow flexion with the biceps
muscle, the perpendicular distance from the joint axis of rotation to the tendon’ s line of
action varies throughout the range of joint motion. When the moment arm (M) is shorter ,
there is less mechanical adv antage.
116
FIGURE 2.7 As a free weight  is lifted, the moment arm (M) through which the weight
acts, and thus the resistiv e torque, changes with the horizontal distance from the weight to
the elbow .
Most of the skeletal muscles operate at a considerable
mechanical disadvantage due to the lever arrangement
within the body and relative to the external forces the
body resists. Thus, during sport and other physical
activities, forces in the muscles and tendons are much
117
higher than those exert ed by the hands or feet on
external objects or the ground.
Variations in Tendon Insertion
Consider able variation in human anatomical structur e exists,
including the points at which tendons are attached to bone. A person
whose tendon s are inserted on the bone farther from the joint
center should be able to lift heavier weights because muscle force
acts through a longer moment arm and thus can produce greater
torque around the joint. (In figure 2.6, for example, consider how
the moment arm [M] would change  if the tendo n insertion were
farther to the right.) It is important, howev er, to recogniz e the trade-
off involved in tendon insertion. The mechanical advantage gained
by having tendons insert farther from the joint center is
accompanied by a loss of maximum speed because, with the tendon
inserted farther from the joint center , the muscle has to contract
more to make the joint move through a given range of motion. In
other words, a given amount of muscle shortening results in less
rotation of body segments about a joint, which translates into a loss
in movement speed. Figure 2.8a shows that, starting with the joint
extended, when a hypothetic al muscle shortens by a given amount,
the joint rotates by 37 degrees. Howev er, if the muscle were
inserted farther from the joint center , as in figure 2.8b, the same
amount of muscle shortening  would bring about only 34 degrees of
joint rotation because of the geometry of the dynamic triangle
whose vertices are the muscle insertion and origin and the joint
center of r otation.
118
119
FIGURE 2.8 Changes in joint angle with equal increments of muscle shortening when the
tendon is inserted  (a) closer to and (b) farther from the joint center . Configur ation b has a
larger moment arm and thus greater torque for a given muscle force but less rotation per
unit of muscle contr action and thus slower mo vement speed.
To produce a given joint rotational velocity, a muscle inserted
farther from the joint center must contract at a higher speed, at
which it can generate less force due to the inverse force–velocity
relationship of muscle (45, 46) described later in this chapter .
Therefore, such a tendon arrangement reduces the muscle’ s force
capabi lity during f aster mo vements.
One can see how relatively subtle individual differences in
structur e can result in various advantages and disadvantages.
Although these skeletal arrangements are nonmodi fiable, it is
important to understand that for slower movements, as in
powerl ifting, tendon insertion farther from the joint than normal can
be advantageous, while for athletic activities occurring at high
speeds, such as hitting a tennis ball, such an arrangeme nt can be
disadv antageous.
120
Anatomical Planes and Major Body
Movements
Figure 2.9a illustrates a person standing in the standar d
anatomical position , standing upright, arms by the sides, and with
the palms facing forward. So-called anatomical views of the body are
often used in clinical settings (e.g., medical imaging), but in
biomechanics they also provide reference positions that can be used
when describing human movement. The sagittal , frontal , and
transverse planes  present the body as if sliced into left–right,
front–back, and upper –lowe r sections, respectiv ely, although not
necessari ly through the midpoint. Examples of exercise movements
that take place in these three planes include the biceps curl (sagittal;
figure 2.9b), lateral raise (frontal; figure 2.9c), and dumbbel l fly
(transverse; figure 2.9d).
Biomechanical analysis of human movement can be used to select
and quanti tatively analyz e the target activity. Depending on its
complexi ty, often simple visual observ ation is adequate for
identi fying the basic features of the movement pattern and the
opportuni ties for developing or maintaining postur al form to achiev e
the desired performance outcome. Exercises can be selected that
target a similar plane of movement around the same joints, thereby
promoting specificity of training. Then with practice, this approach
can be extended to compound exercises, which concurr ently use
multiple planes of mo vement.
Figure 2.10 presents a grid of body movements that could be
used to develop a programming approach oriented to specific
anatomical planes. Selecting exercises for which the dominant plane
is either sagittal, frontal, or transverse might seem restrictive, but
since few body movements occur in one of these major  planes in
isolation, there is usually a cross-tr aining effect; that is, exercising
muscles within the planes also strengthens them for movements
between the planes. Although a program providing resistance
121
exercises for all the movements in figure 2.10 would be both
compr ehensiv e and balanced, some of the movements are
commonly omitted from standar d exercise programs whereas others
receive particular emphasis.
FIGURE 2.9 The three planes  of the human body in the (a) anatomical position with
exercise examples:  (b) biceps curl (sagittal), (c) lateral raise (frontal), and (d) dumbbel l fly
(transverse).
Standar d resistance training programs often lack particular sport-
specific exercises, such as shoulder internal and external rotation
(used in throwing, serving, pitching, or bowling), knee flexion
122
(sprinting), hip flexion (kicking, sprinting), ankle dorsiflexion
(running), hip internal and external rotation (landing, pivoting), hip
adduction and abduction (lateral cutting or changing direction), and
torso transverse rotation  (throwing, hitting, or batting).
Incorpor ating the principle of dynamic correspondence into training
programs can enhance their effectiveness for sport performance.
This principle involves elemen ts such as the amplitude and direction
of movements, accentuated regions of force production, dynamics of
effort, rate and timing of maximum force production, regime of
muscular work, and segmental interr elation (16, 55). By considering
these criteria and accounting for the multiplanar contributions of
muscles, joints, and body segments, strength and conditioning
professionals can create exercise programs that more effectively
target specific sporting activities, thereby maximizing their athletes’
chances of suc cess.
123
124
FIGURE 2.10 Major body movements. Planes of movement are relative to the body in
the anato mical position unless otherwise stated. Common exercises that provide resistance
to the mo vements and r elated sport activi ties ar e listed.
125