# Section 3.5

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 3: Bioenergetics of Exercise and Training

**Section:** 3.5 -- Oxygen Uptake and Aerobic/Anaerobic Contributions

**PDF Pages:** 219--226

duration of the activ e portion of each work bout,
intensi ty of the r ecovery portion of each work bout,
duration of the r ecovery portion of each work bout,
number of work bouts perf ormed in each set,
number of sets,
rest time between sets,
recovery intensi ty between sets, and
mode of ex ercise for HIIT .
The authors (24) indicate, howev er, that the intensi ties and
durations of the active and recovery portions of each work bout are
the most important factors to consider . To optimiz e HIIT training
adaptations for athletes, HIIT sessions should maximiz e the time
spent at or near V̇O2max. In comparison to more gener al interv al
training, during HIIT specifically, the cumulativ e duration and
intensi ty of the active portio ns of the work bouts should equate to
several minutes abo ve 90% of V̇O2max (24).
The benefi ts of a HIIT protocol designed to repeatedly  elicit a
very high percentage of V̇O2max are primari ly the result of the
concurr ent recruitment of large motor units and near-maximal
cardiac output (6). Thus, HIIT provides a stimulus for both oxidativ e
muscle fiber adaptation and myocardial hypertr ophy. Additional HIIT
adaptations include increases  in V̇O2max, proton buffering, glycogen
content, anaer obic thresholds, time to exhaustion, and time-trial
performance. For example, Gibala and cowork ers (63) reported
equiv alent improvements in muscle buffering capaci ty and glycogen
content for HIIT at 250% of V̇O2peak during four to six 30-se cond
cycling sprints compar ed to continuous cycling for 90 to 120 minutes
at 65% of V̇O2peak over six total training sessions. In addition, 750
kilojoules cycling time trials decreased in both groups by 10.1% and
7.5% in the HIIT and long, slow endur ance training groups,
respectiv ely. Thus, HIIT provided performance and physiological
adaptations equivalent to those of long, slow endur ance training but
in a time-ef ficient manner .
219
Combining Training Modalities
Some suggest that aerobic endur ance training should be added to
the training of anaer obic athletes to enhance recovery, because it is
postulated that recovery relies primari ly on aerobic mechanisms. In
contrast, it is postulated that anaer obic resistance training should be
added to aerobic endur ance training because it can aid in preventing
soft tissue injuries. Howev er, when considering the metabol ic
specificity of training, thoug ht should be given to whether the
practitioner is programming combination training, cross-tr aining, or
concurr ent training. These are related but distinctly  different
concepts when seeking to achiev e metabol ic specific training
adaptations. Broadly, combination training  refers to any training
program that includes a mix of different types of exercises or
activities. It does not necessa rily imply a specific structur e or timing,
just that various exercise modal ities are combined to achiev e overall
fitness improvements. For example, an 800-meter runner may
include sessions of long, slow distance aerobic work alongside more
event-speci fic distances and efforts. In contrast, cross-training
deliberately involves incorpo rating different types of exercise with
the same underlying metabol ic adaptation profile (i.e., enhancing
aerobic capaci ty), without overstressing the primary activity muscles
(e.g., including rowing in a program for a runner), often with the aim
of complemen ting the main sport performance. In comparison,
concurrent training  refers to the simultaneous training of both
anaer obic resistance training and aerobic endur ance training at
multiple times within the same period, often within the same training
session or day. In fact, several studies have demonstr ated that
recovery in anaer obic power  output is related to endur ance fitness
(14, 15, 74). Bogdanis and colleagues (14) reported positive
relationships in power recovery in the first 10 seconds of a cycling
sprint, the resynthesis of PCr, and endur ance fitness (V̇O2max).
Howev er, aerobic endur ance training may reduce anaer obic
performance capabi lities, particularly for high-str ength, high-power
performance (82). This reduction in high-str ength, high-power
220
performance capabi lities could be due to an interference in
anaer obic energy production  capabi lities due to aerobic endur ance
training (153). Additional ly, combined anaer obic and aerobic
endur ance training can reduce gains in muscle girth (36, 128),
maximum strength (36, 76, 128), and speed- and power -related
performance (44 , 73).
Even though the exact mechanism for this interference
phenomenon is unknown and whether there is any threshold limit, it
has been suggested that combination training and, more specifically,
concurr ent training may increase training volume to a level that may
result in overtraining in comparison to aerobic and anaer obic training
alone. Hickson and colleagues (82) provide evidence that concurr ent
training that includes progressive endur ance running and cycling and
heavy resistance training may produce a plateau effect and,
ultimately , a decrease in strength gains. Specifically, it was reported
that the concurr ent training program of heavy resistance training
combined with an endur ance program provided significant
improvements in squat strength during the first seven weeks of the
program, followed by a two-week plateau and then a decrease in
squat strength  during the final two weeks of the program. The
results provided evidence that continual strength gains may be
inhibi ted with progressive concurr ent endur ance training such as
running and cycling. Other mechanisms that have been suggested to
hinder the development of strength when combined with endur ance
training are (a) decreasing rapid voluntary activation, (b) chronical ly
lower muscle glycogen levels that limit intracellular signal ing
responses during resistance training, and (c) fiber type transition to
slow-twitch fibers (114).
Alternativ ely, some studies and reviews indicate that the opposi te
holds true; these suggest that anaer obic training (resistance
training) can improve low- and high-intensi ty exercise endur ance
(54, 83, 84, 136). Sedano and colleagues (134) reported
improvements in performance of highly trained runners as a result of
concurr ent endurance, resistance, and plyometric training. There
221
was no reduction in V̇O2max over the 12 weeks in runners who
participated in resistance and plyometric training. Furthermor e, the
concurr ent training improved performance measur es such as
maximal strength, peak running velocity, and 3-kilometer (1.7 miles)
time trial compar ed to endur ance training alone. Thus, in highly
trained runners it appears that strength training can improve
performance whi le not hindering metabol ic par ameters ( V̇O2max).
Although oxidativ e metabol ism is important for increased
postex ercise V̇O2, lactate removal, and PCr restoration from heavy
anaer obic exercise (e.g., resistance training and sprint training)
(135), care must be used in prescribing aerobic endur ance training
for anaer obic sports. In this context, it should be noted that specific
anaer obic training can stimulate increases in aerobic power and
enhance markers of recovery (54). Thus, it appears that extensiv e
aerobic endur ance training to enhance recovery from anaer obic
events is not necessary and may be counterpr oductiv e in most
strength and power sports.
222
Conclusion
Training programs with increased productivi ty can be designed
through an understanding of how energy is produced during various
types of exercise and how energy production can be modified by
specific training regimens. Which energy system is used to supply
energy for muscular contraction and to perform work is determined
primari ly by the intensi ty of exercise and secondari ly by the duration
of exercise. Metabol ic responses and training adaptations are largely
regulated by exercise characteristics (e.g., intensi ty, duration, and
recovery interv als). How these responses and adaptat ions occur
following physical activity forms the basis for metabol ic specificity of
exercise and training. This principle allows for enhanced athletic
performance through the implementation of improved training
programs.
KEY TERMS
adenosine diphosphate (ADP)
adenosine monophosphate (AMP)
adenosine triphosphatase (A TPase)
adenosine triphosphate (A TP)
adenylate kinase r eaction
aerobic
aerobic gly colysis
allosteric activ ation
allosteric inhibi tion
anabol ism
anaer obic
anaer obic gly colysis
beta o xidation
bioener getics
branched-chain amino acid
calcium A TPase
223
catabol ism
combination tr aining
concurr ent tr aining
Cori cy cle
creatine kinase
creatine phosphate (CP)
cross-tr aining
cytochr ome
depletion
duty cycles
electr on transport chain (ET C)
ender gonic r eaction
energy
energy substr ate
excess postex ercise o xygen consumption (EPOC)
exergonic r eaction
fast gly colysis
flavin adenine dinucleotide (F ADH 2)
gluconeogenesis
glycogenolysis
glycolysis
glycolytic system
high-intensi ty interv al training (HIIT )
hydrolysis
inorganic phosphate
interv al training
Krebs cy cle
lactate
lactate thr eshold (L T)
lactic acid
law of mass action
LT1
LT2
mass action ef fect
224
metabol ic acidosis
metabol ic speci ficity
metabol ism
mitochondria
myokinase r eaction
myosin A TPase
near-equilibrium r eactions
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH)
onset of blood lactate ac cumulation (OBL A)
oxidativ e phosphorylation
oxidativ e system
oxygen debt
oxygen defici t
oxygen uptak e
phosphagen system
phosphocr eatine (PCr)
phosphof ructokinase (PFK)
phosphorylation
pyruvate
rate-limiting step
repletion
slow gly colysis
sodium-potassium A TPase
substr ate-lev el phosphorylation
wet muscle
work-to-rest ratio
STUDY QUESTIONS
  1.  Which of the following best describes the role of lactate during
the dev elopment of peripher al muscle f atigue?
  a.  Lactate ac cumulation and lactic acidosis ar e the primary
cause of peripher al fatigue.
  b.  High tissue lactate concentr ations often corr elate wi th
muscular f atigue, so they ar e thought to be the primary
225
cause of the changes in pH wi th high-intensi ty fatiguing
exercise.
  c.  Lactate is a b y-product of when p yruvate is catalyz ed, and
although metabol ic acidosis has a pr ominent r ole in
peripher al fatigue, other f actors such as an incr eased
intersti tial K+ concentr ation and P i that impairs Ca++
release ha ve been r eported to pla y a role in the
development of peripher al fatigue.
  d.  The ex cess H+ that causes peripher al fatigue primari ly
results from the r apid h ydrolysis of A TP during the
conversion of p yruvate to lactate.
  2.  What is the correct net reaction summary for glycolysis when
pyruvate is con verted to lactate?
  a.  Glucose + 2P i + 2ADP → 2Lactate + 2A TP + 2H 2O + H+
  b.  Glucose + 2P i + 2ADP → 2Lactate + 2A TP + 2H 2O
  c.  Glucose + ADP + cr eatine phosphate → A TP + cr eatine
  d.  Glucose + 2ADP → Lactate + 2A TP
  3.  Metabol ism is the total of which f our reactions?
  a.  aer obic, anaer obic, o xidativ e, and gly colytic
  b.  catabol ic, anabol ic, exergonic, and ender gonic
  c.  anabol ic, catabol ic, gly colytic, and o xidativ e
  d.  h ydrolysis, catabol ic, anabol ic, and ender gonic
  4.  Which enzyme is the most important regulator of glycolysis
and wh y?
  a.  phosphof ructokinase, because i t is the r ate-limiting step
  b.  hex okinase, because i t is the r ate-limiting step
  c.  phosphof ructokinase, because i t is al losteric activ ating
  d.  p yruvate kinase, because i t is the r ate-limiting step
5. During exercise what are the primary and secondary
determinants for which energy system is the primary
contributing system?
a. primary: intensi ty; secondary: t ype
b. primary: intensi ty; secondary: dur ation
226