# Section 3.1

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 3: Bioenergetics of Exercise and Training

**Section:** 3.1 -- Essential Terminology

**PDF Pages:** 174--183

CHAPTER  3
BIOENERGETICS OF
EXERCISE AND TRAINING
Dale W. Chapman, PhD
The author would like to acknowledge the significant contributions of Trent J. Herda and
Joel T . Cramer to this chapter .
After completing this chapter, you will be able to
explain the basic ener gy systems a vailable to supply A TP during
exercise;
understand lactate ac cumulation, metabol ic acidosis, and
cellular mani festations of f atigue;
identi fy patterns of substr ate depletion and r epletion during
various ex ercise intensi ties;
describe the bioener getic f actors that l imit exercise
performance;
critique tr aining pr ograms based on the metabol ic speci ficity of
training; and
explain the metabol ic demands of and r ecovery from interv al
training, high-intensi ty interv al training, and combination
training to optimiz e work -to-rest ratios.
Metabolic specificity  of exercise and training is based on an
understanding of the transfer of energy in biological systems.
174
Through an understanding of how energy transfer occurs, more
efficient and productiv e training programs can be designed. After
defining essential bioener getics terminology and explaining the role
of adenosine triphosphate (ATP), this chapter discusses the three
basic energy systems that work to replenish ATP in human skeletal
muscle. Then we look at substrate depletion and repletion, especial ly
as they relate to fatigue and recovery; bioener getic factors that limit
performance; and aerobic and anaer obic contributions to oxygen
uptak e. Final ly, the metabol ic speci ficity of tr aining is discussed.
175
Essential Terminology
Bioenergetics , or the flow of energy  in a biological system,
concerns primari ly the conversion of macronutrients—carboh ydrate,
protein, and fats, which contain chemical energy—into biological ly
usable forms of energy. It is the breakdown of the chemic al bonds in
these macronutrients that provides the energy necessary to perform
biological work.
The breakdow n of large molecules into smaller molecules,
associated with the release of energy, is termed catabolism . The
synthesis of larger molecules from smaller molecules can be
accompl ished using the energy released from catabol ic reactions;
this building-up process is termed anabolism . The breakdown of
protein into amino acids is an example of catabol ism, while the
formation of proteins from amino acids is an anabol ic process.
Exergonic reactions  are energy-releasing reactions and are
gener ally catabolic. Endergonic reactions  require energy and
include anabol ic processes and the contraction of muscle.
Metabolism  is the sum of all catabol ic or exergonic and anabol ic or
ender gonic reactions in a biological system. Energy derived from
catabol ic or exergonic reactions is used to drive anabol ic or
ender gonic reactions through an intermediate molecule, adenosine
triphosphate (ATP) . ATP allows the transfer of energy from
exergonic to ender gonic reactions. Thus, exergonic (i.e., energy-
releasing) reactions are coupled with ender gonic (i.e., energy-
requiring) reactions, based on the production or breakdown of ATP,
respectiv ely. Without an adequate supply of ATP, muscular activity
and muscle growth would not be possible because the process
reflects the metabol ic system ’s current ability to supply the demand
of the required activity. Thus, when an exercise steady state is
achiev ed, ATP supply meets ATP demand. Howev er, fatigue results
when ATP supply does not meet the ATP requirements demanded by
a given activity. Following a period of appropriate condi tioning, the
metabol ic systems of the body adapt to be better able to supply the
176
ATP to meet the ATP demand of the same activity that once resulted
in fatigue. It is important to note that the nature of the activity has
not changed, but the metabo lic system’ s capaci ty to do the activity
changes with training. Thus, when designing training programs,
strength and condi tioning professionals need to have a basic
understanding of how exercise affects ATP hydrolysis and
resynthesis.
Adenosine triphosphate is composed of adenosine and three
phosphate groups (figure 3.1). Adenosine is the combination of
adenine (a nitrogen-contain ing base) and ribose (a five-carbon
sugar). The breakdown of one molecule of ATP to yield energy is
known as hydrolysis , becau se it requires one molecule of water.
The hydrolysis of ATP is catalyzed by the presence of an enzyme
called adenosine triphosphatase (ATPase) . Specifically, myosin
ATPase  is the enzyme  that catalyz es ATP hydrolysis for crossbridge
recycling. Other specific enzymes hydrolyze ATP at other locations,
such as calcium ATPase  for pumping calcium into the sarcoplasmic
reticulum (following muscle contraction) and sodium-potassium
ATPase  for maintaining the sarcolemmal concentr ation gradient
after depolarization (59). The following equation depicts the
reactants (left), enzyme (middle), and products (right) of ATP
hydrolysis:
 ATP +H2 O↔A TPase ADP  +Pi +H+ +Ener gy     (3.1)
where ADP represents adenosine diphosphate  (only two
phosphate groups, figure 3.1), Pi is an inorganic phosphate
molecule, and H+ is a hydrogen ion (proton). Further hydrolysis of
ADP cleaves the second phosphate group and yields adenosine
monophosphate (AMP) . The energy released primari ly from the
hydrolysis of ATP and secondarily from ADP results in biological
work.
ATP is classified as a high-ener gy molecule because it stores large
amounts of energy in the chemical bonds of the two terminal
phosphate groups. Because muscle cells store ATP only in limited
amounts and activity requires a constant supply of ATP to provide
177
the energy needed for muscle actions, ATP-pr oducing processes
must oc cur in the cel l.
178
Biological Energy Systems
Three basic energy systems  exist in mammal ian muscle cells to
replenish A TP (87 , 124):
Phosphagen
Glycolytic
Oxidativ e
In discussion of exercise-r elated bioener getics, the terms
anaer obic and aerobic metabol ism are often used. Anaerobic
processes do not require the presence of oxygen, whereas aerobic
mechanisms depend on oxygen. The phosphagen  and glycolytic
systems  are anaer obic mechanisms that occur in the sarcoplasm of
a muscle cell. The Krebs cycle , electron transport, and the rest of
the oxidative system are aerobic mechanisms that occur in the
mitochondria  of muscle cells and require oxygen as the terminal
electr on ac ceptor .
Of the three main macronutrients—carboh ydrate, protein, and
fats—only carboh ydrate can be metabol ized for energy without the
direct involvement of oxygen (21). Therefore, carboh ydrate is critical
during anaerobic metabol ism. All three energy systems are active at
any given time; howev er, the magni tude of the contribution of each
system to overall work performance is primari ly dependent on the
intensi ty of the activi ty and secondari ly on the dur ation (45, 87).
Energy stored in the chemical bonds of aden osine
triphosphate (ATP) is used to power muscular activity.
The replenishment of ATP in human skeletal muscle is
accomplished by three basic energy systems: (a)
phosphagen, (b) glycolytic, and (c) oxidative. The first
few seconds of activity are supplied by ATP stores
before these metabolic energy systems begin the
process of replenishing ATP stores and meeting  the
activity demands.
179
Phosphagen System
The phosphagen system provides ATP primari ly for short-term, high-
intensi ty activities (e.g., resistance training and sprinting) and is
highly active at the start of all exercise regardless of intensi ty (62,
70, 155). This energy system relies on the hydrolysis of ATP
(equation 3.1) and breakdown of another high-ener gy phosphate
molecule called creatine phosphate (CP), also called
phosphocreatine (PCr) . Creatine kinase is the enzym e that
catalyz es the synthesis of ATP from CP and ADP in the following
reaction:
 ADP + CP ↔Creatine kinase  ATP + Creatine  (3.2)
180
FIGURE 3.1 (a) The chemical structur e of an ATP molecule showing adenosine (adenine
+ ribose),  the triphosphate group, and locations of the high-ener gy chemical bonds.  (b)
The hydrolysis of ATP breaks the terminal phosphate bond, releases energy, and leaves
ADP, a Pi, and a hydrogen ion (H+). (c) The hydrolysis of ADP breaks the terminal
phosphate bond, r eleases ener gy, and lea ves AMP , Pi, and H+.
181
CP supplies a phosphate group that combines with ADP to
replenish ATP. The creatine kinase reaction provides energy at a high
rate; however, because CP is stored in relatively small amounts, the
phosphagen system cannot be the primary supplier of energy for
continuous, long-dur ation activi ties (30).
ATP Stores
The body stores approximate ly 80 to 100 grams (about 3 oz) of ATP
at any given time, which does not represent a significant energy
reserv e for exercise (109). In addition, ATP stores cannot be
completely depleted due to the necessi ty for basic cellular function.
In fact, ATP concentr ations may only decrease by up to 50% to 60%
(34, 71, 102, 145) of the pre-exercise levels during experimental ly
induced muscle fatigue. Therefore, the phosphagen system uses the
creatine kinase reaction (equation 3.2) to maintain the ATP
concentr ation. Under normal circumstances, skeletal muscle
concentr ations of CP are four to six times higher than ATP
concentr ations (109). Therefore, the phosphagen system, through
CP and the creatine kinase reaction, serves as an energy reserv e for
rapidly replenishing ATP. In addition, type II (fast-twitch) muscle
fibers contain higher concent rations of CP than type I (slow-twitch)
fibers (95, 134); thus, individuals with higher percentages of type II
fibers may be able to replenish ATP more quickly through the
phosphagen system during anaer obic, explosiv e exercise.
Another important single-enzyme reaction that can rapidly
replenish ATP is the adenylate kinase  (also called myokinase )
reaction :
2ADP↔Aden ylate kinaseA TP +AMP     (3.3)
This reaction is particularly important because AMP, a product of the
adenylate kinase (myokinase) reaction, is a powerf ul stimulant of
glycolysis  (22, 28).
182
Control of the Phosphagen System
The phosphagen system reactions (often represented by equations
3.1, 3.2, and 3.3) are largely controlled by the law of mass action
or the mass action effect  (109). The law of mass action states
that the concentr ations of reactants or products (or both) in solution
will drive the direction of the reactions. With enzyme-mediated
reactions, such as the reactions of the phosphagen system, the rate
of product formation is greatly influenced by the reactant
concentr ations. This is denote d in equations 3.1, 3.2, and 3.3 by the
two-way arrow between reactants and products. For example, as
ATP is hydrolyzed to yield the energy necessary for exercise
(equation 3.1), there is a transient increase in ADP concentrations
(as well as Pi) in the sarcolemma. This will increase the rate of
creatine kinase and adenylate kinase reaction (equations 3.2 and
3.3) to replenish the ATP supply . The process will continue until the
exercise ceases or the intensi ty reduces such that it does not deplete
CP stores and thus glycolysis or the oxidativ e system can become
the primary supplier of ATP and rephosphorylate the free creatine
(equation 3.2) (37). At this point, the sarcoplasmic concentr ation of
ATP will remain steady or increase, which will slow down  or reverse
the directions of the creatine  kinase and adenylate kinase reactions.
As a result, equations 3.1, 3.2, and 3.3 are often referred to as
near-equilibrium reactions  that proceed in a direction dictated by
the concentr ations of the r eactants due to the la w of mass action.
Glycolytic System
Glycolysis is the breakdown  of carboh ydrate—ei ther as glycogen
stored in the muscle or glucose delivered via the blood—to
resynthesiz e ATP (22, 145). The process of glycolysis involves
multiple enzymatical ly catalyz ed reactions (figure 3.2). As a result,
the ATP resynt hesis rate during glycolysis is not as rapid as with the
single-step phosphagen system; howev er, the capaci ty to produce
ATP is much higher due to a larger supply of glycogen and glucose
183