# Section 4.3

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 4: Endocrine Responses to Resistance Exercise and Training

**Section:** 4.3 -- Endocrine System in Resistance Training

**PDF Pages:** 251--265

maximal amounts of motor units and enhance receptor binding.
Howev er, such workouts’ relatively low metabol ic demands typical ly
result in only modest, if any, increases in blood concentr ations of
testoster one, IGF-1, and growth hormone. Nevertheless, slight
hormonal changes, combined with paracrine and autocrine  signal ing,
are generally sufficient to effectively signal via receptors  and other
molecular pathways within tissues in the neuromuscular system to
stimulate growth and repair. Conversely , a workout that involves
8RM to 10RM resistances, short rest periods of 1 to 2 minutes, and a
higher volume of work produces greater metabol ic demands on the
body. The metabol ic stress is evidenced by significant increases in
blood lactate and a surge in both anabol ic and catabol ic hormones.
These hormonal changes signal skeletal muscle receptors effectively,
even with the recruitment of fewer motor units using lighter
resistances. Periodization strategies that incorpor ate a range of
different resistances over time ensur e effective muscle activation
across various workout styles, where hormones help mediate
changes. Such workout design variations reflect the complex nature
of exercise-ind uced hormon al activation and its contribution to
adaptiv e changes in the body .
Hormone responses in the blood are tightly linked to the
characteristics of the resistance exercise protocol.
251
Adaptations in the Endocrine System
From Resistance Training
Resistance training affects muscles and connectiv e tissues and
significantly affects the other physiological systems, including the
endocrine system. This type of training also trains the endocrine
glands, with the gland’ s involvement dependent on the demands of
the motor units activated during exercise. The endocrine system’ s
adaptations to r esistance tr aining include changes in the f ollowing:
Hormone synthesis and stor age
Hormone tr ansport via binding pr oteins
Clearance and degr adation r ates of hormones
Fluid shi fts from blood to tissues during ex ercise
Hormone–r eceptor binding af finity
The number of tissue r eceptors
Glandular cel l changes
The intensity of signals sent to cell nuclei by hormone–
receptor complex es
Cellular inter actions influencing muscle pr otein pr oduction
Hormones are secreted to maintain homeostasis, regulating
physiological functions during both the acute stress of a workout and
chronic stress from long-term training, which activates these
homeostatic mechanisms (17, 33, 34, 41, 49, 56, 125, 126, 130).
These adaptations might lead to subtle changes in resting hormone
levels, demons trating the dynamic responsiv eness of the endocrine
system to ph ysical tr aining.
252
Primary Anabolic Hormones in Musc le
Development
Key anabol ic hormones that drive muscle tissue growth and
remodel ing include testoster one, growth hormone, and insulin-like
growth factors (IGFs), with additional roles played by insulin and
thyroid hormones (25, 26, 27 , 28, 38, 91).
Testosterone’s Role in Musc le Adaptation
Testoster one, the primary androgen affecting skeletal muscle, and
dihydrotestoster one, which acts mainly on sex-linked tissues, play
crucial roles in the body. While circulating testoster one levels
indicate anabol ic activity, the actual binding of testoste rone to its
receptor is vital for stimulatin g muscle growth. Binding to androgen
genomic and non-genomic receptors activates various signal ing
pathways that enhance gene expression for muscle hypertr ophy and
suppr ess those  involved in protein degradation. Therefore, increased
testoster one levels due to increased motor unit activation indicate
metabol ic demands beyond homeostatic condi tions and are
associated wi th enhanced r eceptor binding (124 , 133).
Testoster one also indirectly affects muscle growth by promoting
the release of growth hormone from the pituitary, which influences
muscle protein synthesis. This hormone’ s relationship with growth
hormone is either permissiv e or syner gistic in promoting protein
synthesis (103). Furthermor e, testoster one affects the nervous
system by interacting with neuron receptors, altering
neurotransmi tter amounts, and influencing structur al protein
changes wi thin muscle cel ls (9, 67 , 91).
After secretion from the primary production sites, the testes in
men and the ovaries and adrenal cortex in women, testoster one is
carried to target tissues by binding proteins, primari ly sex hormone–
binding globul in and albumin. At the target site, testoster one
dissociates from these proteins and crosses the cell membr ane to
253
bind to intracellular androgen receptors, directly influencing DNA
transcription. Testoster one also binds to membr ane receptors,
enabl ing rapid intr acellular ef fects like calcium r elease (21, 131).
Understanding the varied impacts of testoster one and its
interaction with exercise condi tions reveals how differential forces on
cell membr anes during resistance training or feedback mechanisms
to the brain can alter cellular actions and receptor interactions (18).
Despi te increases in testoster one concentr ations during high-
intensi ty aerobic endur ance exercise, significant hypertr ophy does
not typical ly occur. The lack of hypertr ophy may be due to oxidativ e
stress, which can lead to reduced type I muscle fiber size to optimize
oxygen transport distances to mitochondria. High-intensi ty
endur ance training, including  interv als performed alone, has been
shown to lead to decr eases in t ype I muscle fibers (88).
Influence of Sex Hormones
Testoster one, while primari ly recogniz ed as a male sex hormone,
also plays a significant role in women, who naturally have only about
5% to 10% of the circulating testoster one levels found in men due
to the absence of testes. Resear ch on testoster one responses in
women following resistance exercise has yielded mixed results. Most
studies have not shown a notable acute increase in total
testoster one after workouts; if increases are observ ed, they are
gener ally small (15, 23, 51, 56, 81, 134). Howev er, some studies
note these increases specifically in free testoster one, which is not
bound to binding proteins and thus can interact freely with cells
(133).
A study found that younger  women experienced a modest but
significant increase in serum testoster one after performing six sets
of squats at a 10RM with 2 minutes of rest between sets at 80% of
the 1 RM (111). Additional ly, Vingren and colleagues observ ed that
highly resistance-tr ained men and women exhibi ted acute rises in
free testoster one following heavy resistance exercises. However, the
values in women were significantly lower than those in men (133).
254
While women have lower baseline testoster one levels, exercise can
still influence their hormone lev els.
Moreover, individual variations exist among women, with some
producing higher concentr ations of adrenal androgens. A study
comparing active women with inactiv e controls found differences in
baseline testos terone levels, indicating that regular exercise might
influence these levels (15). Despi te these findings, other resear ch
has not consistently demonstr ated changes in serum testoster one
concentr ations in women with training (23, 51, 56, 81, 134),
highlighting the complexi ty of hormonal responses to resistance
exercise in women.
While testoster one levels in women are lower, the dynamic
interaction between testoster one, SHBG, DHT, and androgen
receptors facilitates significant responses to resistance exercise.
These interactions can include muscle mass and strength increases,
essential for physical health and metabol ic function. The response of
androgen receptors to even small increases in testoster one and the
compensatory role of other androgens like DHT emphasiz e the
complex but critical nature of androgens in female physiology and
resistance ex ercise.
An interpla y between free and total testoster one is critical for
optimizing exercise outcome s. Free testoster one, which represents
only 0.5% to 2% of total testoster one, is vital for direct interaction
with muscle tissues. Younger men gener ally exhibit higher
postex ercise increases in free testoster one compar ed to older men,
indicating a greater possibi lity for muscle tissue interaction (82).
According to the free hormone hypothesis, the free, unbound
hormone interacts with target tissues. Howev er, bound  hormones
may also enhance hormone delivery to these tissues, potential ly
benefi ting younger individuals more significantly (19). Due to
women’ s relatively low total testoster one levels, changes in
hormone-binding proteins could substantial ly regulate hormone
activity, suggesting that these  binding proteins might act as bioactiv e
hormones (120).
255
Exercise-Induced Responses
Men’s testoster one levels are gener ally highest in the morning and
gradual ly decrease throughout the day. Howev er, this does not mean
that morning workouts are more effective than afternoon workouts.
The effectiveness of exercise depends more on the availability of
hormone receptors in both men and women, which is not directly
linked to the body’s circadian rhythm. Exercise can trigger increases
any time, with the overall response related to intensi ty, volume, and
rest periods between sets (17, 23, 44, 48, 81, 134). Howev er, the
magni tude of the testoster one’s response is, as with all hormones,
dependent on where blood is sampled in the hormone’ s circadian
cycle (e.g., testoster one is higher in the morning than in the late
afternoon), and thus, it is important to understand where a measur e
of a hormone was made and if the study has a resting control for
the time of day to determin e the magni tude above resting levels
accurately. Its circadian cycle is important for the interpr etation of
the results of a study. Most studies have used the morning time
frames.
Testoster one dynamics in young males, particularly those under
18, are influenced significantly by pubert y, affecting their responses
to exercise. Prepubescent boys produce minimal testoster one, which
limits exercise-induced hypertr ophy. Adolescent males can enhance
serum testoster one levels through exercises that engage large
muscle groups like squats and deadl ifts, using heavy resistance of
85% to 95% of their 1RM, and maintaining high exercise volume
with short rest interv als between sets, but the levels in women were
dramatical ly lower (figure 4.5; 133). It took two years of training in
young weightl ifters (14-17 years) before an exercise-induced
testoster one effect was observ ed. While resistance training may not
raise resting testoster one levels, repeated exposur e to resistance
training could help younger boys develop their hypothalamic -
pituitary-gonadal axis, enabl ing a more robust testoster one response
to acute r esistance ex ercise (35).
256
FIGURE 4.5 Responses of (a) total testosterone and (b) free testoster one in response to
six sets of squats at 80% of the 1RM with 2 minutes rest between sets. The midpoint (Mid)
sample is after three sets. * indicates a significant increase from pre-exercise values. #
indicates a signi ficant di fference f rom women at the corr esponding time point.
Reprinted by permission from J.L. Vingren, W.J. Kraemer, D.L. Hatfield, et al., “Effect of Resistance Exercise on Muscle
Steroid Receptor Protein Content in Strength Trained Men and Women,” Steroids, 74 (2009): 1033-1039, with
permission from Elsevier.
Training Adaptations of Testosterone and
Impact on Androgen Receptors
Resear ch continues to expand our understanding of how
testoster one responds to resistance training, revealing that
testoster one levels dynamical ly respond to exercise demands,
257
influencing receptor activity and adaptations in different tissues like
nerves and satellite cells (49, 88, 126, 133, 135). Traditional
expectations that testoster one consistently increases in resting
states may be outdated; however, exercise-induced testoster one
levels are expected to rise due to enhanced functional capaci ty and
workload during training sessions. These hormonal changes may be
linked to neural adaptations that enhance performance . Häkkinen
and colleagues  (49) noted little change in muscle fiber size despite
the increases in testoster one, follicle-stimulating hormone, and
luteinizing hormone. Such data demonstr ate that the improvements
were more likely driven by neural factors augmented by hormonal
changes r ather than signi ficant muscle gr owth.
Over time, factors such as training duration and experien ce play
critical roles in hormonal adjustments. For instance, a notable study
by Häkkinen and colleagues (49) observ ed small but significant
increases in resting serum testoster one levels over two years among
elite weightlifters, alongside increases in follicle-stimulating hormone
and luteinizing hormone, which are crucial in regulating testoster one
production.
Testoster one also supports the development of the nervous
system and enhances neural adaptations necessary for strength
gains, particularly in highly trained athletes (51, 52). Additional ly,
training sessions that acutely elevate testoster one levels have been
linked to more remarkable resistance training adaptations (53, 119).
The effects of resistance  training on androgen receptors—
testoster one’s binding sites—are emerging as an area of significant
interest, with studies showing both increases and decreases in
androgen receptor content and DNA binding, depending on the
exercise protocol and timing of tissue sampl ing (12, 93, 118, 132,
133, 136). For example, Cardaci and colleagues noted that androgen
receptor -DNA binding increased only after high-intensi ty total body
resistance exercises and not after low-intensi ty exercises (12).
Despi te these variations, resistance training gener ally appears to
boost muscle androgen receptor content, thereby enhancing
258
testoster one use. The training effects for women remain unclear
because only small increases in the exercise-induced response have
been noted. Yet the androgen receptors in trained women rapidly
respond to the available testoster one after exercise (111, 133).
Nutritional strategies, particularly consuming proteins and
carboh ydrates before a workout, have been shown to upregulate
skeletal muscle androgen receptor content, emphasizing the
importance of prework out nutrition (93). While most exercise studies
have evaluated fasted states, interestingly , as pre- and post-protein
and carboh ydrate supplementation are used, a reduction in the
testoster one values is observ ed, most likely due to the greater
uptak e by the muscle f or use.
259
Growth Hormone
Growth hormone (GH) is produced in the pituitary gland by
somatotr oph cells, divided into two types based on their secretion
patterns and the forms of GH. Band 1 somatotr ophs gener ate the
smaller, newly synthesiz ed 22 kD molecular weight isoform of GH, a
191 amino acid polypeptide. Conversely , band 2 somatotrophs
produce aggregates of these smaller isoforms (e.g., two 22 kD units
combining to form a 44 kD molecule), which are consider ed older
and are potential GH storage forms (61). These aggregates can be
released into the bloodstr eam, interacting with specific tissue
receptors. For instance, aggregated GH binds to receptors in the
tibial growth plate to stimulate bone growth. These different
molecular weight variants target various tissues, including bone,
muscle, liver, and immune cells, influencing glucose use, protein
synthesis, lipolysis, collagen synthesis, and enhancing immune cell
function.
The presence of different GH isoforms in the blood can only be
distinguished through various assays, with most studies focusing on
the smaller 22 kD isoform using immunoassa ys. This focus has
shaped much of our current understanding of GH’s role and function
in the body, but the aggregated forms of GH might have greater
biological potency and importance (61, 91). Figure 4.6 outlines the
basic feedback mechanisms regulating the production of GH
isoforms, highlighting the complex control the pituitary gland
exercises o ver GH secr etion.
260
FIGURE 4.6 Diagr am of the basic growth hormone cybernetics and interactions.
Remember that GH will be secreted from two different types (I and II) of anterior pituitary
somatotr ophs, each r eleasing di fferent molecular weight isof orms.
Resistance exercise increases the 22 kD isoform in both men and
women. It is sensitive to the amount of total work performed and
the rest period duration used because these affect the demands on
the glycolytic energy system and H+ ion production; drops in pH are
a key stimulator of 22 GH release (41, 54). Women have been
shown to have higher resting values of the 22 kD isoform of GH than
men in the early follicular phase of the menstrual cycle (81). GH
levels in women tend to be higher during the menstrual cycle’s
follicular phase than in the luteal phase. During the follicular phase,
which occurs from the beginning of menstruation until ovulation,
estrogen levels rise, and this hormonal environment is associated
with increased GH secretion. While GH is present throughout the
entire cycle, its secretion is gener ally more pronounced during this
phase due to the influenc e of estrogen, which stimulates GH
production. Additional ly, oral contraceptiv e use can influence
women’ s acute GH response to exercise (84). Specifically, women
who used oral contraceptiv es exhibi ted a blunted or reduced GH
261
response compar ed to those not using oral contraceptiv es. Figure
4.7 (79, 83) demo nstrates the response patterns of GH to low- and
high-volume exercise workouts in which exercise response patterns
to different work outs ar e simi lar in men and women.
The body’s response to GH varies with resistance exercise, and
understanding these responses is crucial for optimizin g training
outcomes. Initially observ ed in studies from the late 1970s to early
1990s, resistance training can acutely elevate GH levels in the blood,
particularly through exercises involving large muscle groups and high
intensi ty (100, 123, 130). Resear ch has shown that the type of
workout—especial ly the intensi ty, volume, and rest periods—
significantly affects acute GH responses (75, 83). Short rest periods
combined with moder ate resistance tend to produce higher GH
spikes compar ed to longer r est periods.
While resting concentr ations are not typical ly affected by training,
the ability to do more total work or tolerate greater increases in H+
ions and resultant pH decreases allows for greater peak GH
concentr ations in recovery. While gener al responses are similar to
those in men, subtle differences exist due to factors such as the
menstrual cycle and hormonal contraception, affecting GH levels and
their response  to exercise. Yet the impact on training appears
minimal (79, 81, 85).
Resistance training affects the various molecular or aggregate
forms of GH, with evidence showing that high-intensi ty workouts
lead to increased production  of the 22 kD GH isoform. Howev er,
resear ch using bioassa ys suggests that resistance training might
reduce the release of larger GH aggregates, indicating a shift toward
more newly synthesiz ed GH and less storage in aggregates (60, 72,
104). This adaptation might reflect an evolved response in the
anterior pi tuitary gland, particularly in highly tr ained individuals.
262
Insulin-Like G rowth Factors and Binding
Proteins
IGFs, primari ly IGF-1 and IGF-2, are small polypeptides crucial for
various anabol ic processes in the body, including cellular growth,
development, and metabol ism. These growth factors are structur ally
similar to insulin and originate from larger precursor molecules
modified posttranslational ly to become active. IGF-1, the most
resear ched, is predominantly synthesiz ed in the liver in response to
stimulation by 22 kD GH (16, 22, 27, 91). Besides GH, IGF synthesis
is also influenced by thyroid hormones and testoster one (137, 138,
139, 140).
IGFs perform several functions, including enhancing protein
synthesis, increasing amino acid transport across cell membr anes,
and stimulating growth in tissues such as muscle and bone. In the
bloodstr eam, IGFs are mostly  bound to proteins, with only about 2%
in the free (unbound) form; same as for other hormones, the
binding proteins regulate IGF activity and availability. These binding
proteins are critical in modulating the growth-pr omoting actions of
the IGFs (91). Additional ly, IGFs stimulate the secretion of their
binding proteins within muscle cells, influencing cellular sensitivity to
IGFs (105). IGF binding proteins (IGFBPs) are a group of proteins
that regulate the bioavailability and activity of IGFs. There are six
main types of IGFBPs (IGFBP -1 to IGFBP-6) found in humans, each
with distinct binding affinities, tissue distributions, and biological
functions. IGFBPs can inhibi t or enhance the action of IGFs by doing
the following:
1. Binding IGFs with high affinity, which prevents their interaction
with IGF receptors and modulates their half-life, transport, and
tissue local ization
2. Regulating IGF turno ver and clear ance in the cir culation
263
3. Interacting with cellular components, influencing various
cellular pr ocesses independently of IGFs
IGFBPs are involved in numer ous physiological processes,
including gr owth r egulation, cel l proliferation, and di fferentiation.
FIGURE 4.7 The 22 kD growth hormone (GH) normal ized responses to high-volume (HV)
and low-volume (LV) total body workout of eight resistance exercises. Men: LV (49KJ) and
HV (60KJ) , and women: LV (25KJ) and HV (32KJ). LV used 3-minute rest periods and a
5RM, and HV used 1-minute r est periods and a 10RM.
Data normalized from Kraemer et al. (1993) and Kraemer et al. (1990).
264
IGF Responses to Exercise
The role of IGFs extends to exercise response, where resistance
exercise particularly influences their production and activity.
Mechanical stress from resistance exercise triggers muscle fibers to
produce IGF-1  locally, which then acts to stimulate muscle growth
and repair. This local production is often more critical than the
circulating levels of IGF-1, which may not consistently change with
resistance exercise (109, 113). The response of IGF-1 to heavy
resistance exercise can vary, influenced by the initial levels of IGF-1
before training and the response of GH. Studies indicate that lower
baseline IGF-1 levels typical ly lead to increases after exercise,
whereas highe r baseline levels may result in no change or even
decreases (W.J. Kraemer , unpubl ished data). Nutritional status,
including caloric intake and restriction, also significantly modulates
resting and exercise-induce d IGF-1 concentr ations (55, 92). In
women, resistance training has increased total IGF-1 levels and
decreased IGF-binding protein-1 during workouts, suggesting
exercise-speci fic adaptations in the IGF system (43). The IGF
superf amily’s complex response patterns to training involve
mechanisms such as IGF type, release, transport, and receptor
interactions, along with interactions with other anabol ic hormones
targeting similar outcomes such as protein synthesis. Howev er,
highly trained men and women both showed increases in IGF-1
concentr ations, but women demonstr ated values higher than men at
all time points. In these trained men and women, IGFBP-1 and 2
showed increases with exercise with no sex-dependent differences,
yet IGFBP-3 concentr ations were higher in women at all time points
with no ex ercise-induced changes (54).
265