# Section 5.5

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 5: Adaptations to Anaerobic Training

**Section:** 5.5 -- Cardiovascular Adaptations

**PDF Pages:** 331--338

Muscular Strength
A review of more than 100 studies has shown that mean strength can
increase approximately 40% in untrained, 20% in moder ately trained, 16% in
trained, 10% in advanced, and 2% in elite participants over periods ranging
from four weeks to two y ears (10).
With training, a positive shift in muscle fiber types reflects an augmented
recruitment of higher -order motor units. Type IIx fibers transition to type IIa
fibers and reflect a greater fatigue resistance at similar absolute force output
as well as an increase in muscle myofibrillar content through hypertr ophy
(146).
Power
The optim al load for maximizing absolute peak power output in the jump
squat is 0% of the 1RM (i.e., body weight [31]). Howev er, it has been
reported that peak power output is maximiz ed in trained power athletes with
higher loads corr esponding to 30% to 60% of a squat 1RM (16).
Peak power in the squat is maximiz ed at 56% of the 1RM and in the power
clean at 80% of the 1RM (31).
For the upper body, peak power output can be maximiz ed during the ballistic
bench press throw using loads corresponding to 46% to 62% of a bench
press 1RM (15, 128).
Local Muscular Endurance
Cross-sectional data in anaer obic athletes have shown enhanced muscular
endur ance and subsequent muscular adaptations consistent with improved
oxidativ e and buf fering capaci ty (60).
Skeletal muscle adaptations to anaer obic muscular endur ance training include
fiber-type transitions from type IIx to type IIb, as well as increases in
mitochondrial and capillary numbers, buffering capaci ty, resistance to fatigue,
and metabol ic enzyme activi ty (60).
Body Composition
Resistance training can increase fat-free mass and reduce body fat by up to
9% (116).
Increases in lean tissue mass, daily metabol ic rate, and energy expendi ture
during ex ercise ar e outcomes of r esistance tr aining (53).
Flexibility and Mobility
Anaer obic training potential ly can have a positive impact on flexibi lity, and a
combination of resistance training and stretching appears to be the most
effective method to improve flexibi lity with increasing muscle mass (8). When
exercises are performed properly through a full range of motion, mobility may
331
be enhanced or maintained through resistance training with loads greater
than only body mass.
Aerobic Capacity
In untrained people, heavy resistance training can increase V̇O2max from 5%
to 8%. In trained individuals, resistanc e training does not significantly affect
aerobic capaci ty (52).
Circuit training, high-intensi ty interv al training, and programs using high
volume, high intensi ties, and short rest periods (i.e., 30 s or less) have been
shown to impr ove V̇O2max (25).
Motor Performance
Resistance training has been shown to increase running econom y, vertica l
and broad jumps, sprint speed, cycling power , tennis serve velocity, swinging
and thr owing v elocity, and kicking perf ormance (116).
Power development appears to be negativ ely affected more than
strength during concurr ent high-intensi ty resistance and aerobic
endur ance training. Häkkinen  and colleagues (70) reported similar
dynamic and isometric strength increases following 21 weeks of
concurr ent training or resistance training only; howev er, the
resistance training–only group showed improvements in the rate of
force development whereas the concurr ent training group did not
match this increase. Kraemer  and colleagues (94) also showed that a
resistance training–only group increased muscle power whereas a
combined group did not. The resistance training–only group also
increased peak power in upper and lower body tests while the
combined group did not. It appears that power development is much
more susceptible to the antagonistic effects of combined strength
and aerobic endur ance training than slow-velocity strength (94).
Finally, the sequence may play a role in the magni tude of adaptation
(51).
332
Detraining
Detraining  is the term given to a decrement in performance and
loss of the accumulated physiological adaptations following the
cessation of anaer obic training or when there is a substantial
reduction in frequency , volume, intensi ty, or any combination of
these variables. According to the principles of reversibi lity, training-
induced adaptations are transient and thus can disappear  when the
training load is insufficient or removed completely . The result is a
partial or complete loss of the anatomical, physiological, and
performance adaptations that have been made (123). The
magni tude of these losses is dependent on the length of the
detraining period as well as the initial training status of the
individual.
Following the removal of a training stimulus is a lag time before
the effects of detraining are fully observ ed. Strength performance in
gener al is readily maintained for up to four weeks of inactivity, but in
highly trained athletes, eccentric force and sport-speci fic power may
decline significantly faster (124). In trained weightl ifters, removing
the training stimulus for 14 days did not significantly affect 1RM
strength performance in the bench press (−1.7%) and squat
(−0.9%), isometric (−7%) and isokinetic concentric knee extension
force (−2.3%), or vertical jump performance (1.2%) (108). In
recreational ly trained men, very little change is seen during the first
six weeks of detraining (92). Longer periods of training cessation are
accompanied by significantly  pronounced declines in the strength
performance of strength-tr ained athletes (124), but this loss is still
limited to 7% to 12% during periods of inactivi ty ranging  from 8 to
12 weeks.
This strength loss is coupled with decreased average maximal
bilateral and unilateral intramuscular EMG. Indeed, strength
reductions appear related to neural mechanisms initially, with
atrophy predominating as the detraining period extends.
Interestingly , the amount of muscle strength retained is rarely lower
333
than pretraining values, indicating that resistance training has a
residual effect when the stimulus is removed. Howev er, when the
athlete returns to training, the rate of strength reattainment is high,
supporting the par adigm of muscle memory (153).
With respect to muscle fiber characteristics following the cessation
of training, it appears that fiber disruption remains unchanged
during the initial weeks of inactivi ty, but oxidativ e fibers may
increase in strength-tr ained athletes (decrease in endur ance
athletes) within eight weeks of stopping training (124). In strength-
trained athletes, 14 days of inactivi ty has been reported to have no
effect on muscle fiber type distribution (78). In comparison, muscle
fiber CSA declines rapidly in strength and sprint athletes (124). In 12
trained weightl ifters, Hortobagyi and colleagues (78) observ ed a
decline of 6.4% in fast-twitch fiber CSA in 14 days. These changes
specifically targeted fast-twitch fibers initially, with no significant
change immediately found in the slow-twitch fiber population.
Longer periods  of stoppage bring about declines in both fast- and
slow-twitch fiber CSA and muscle mass in anaer obical ly trained
athletes.
334
Conclusion
Anaer obic exercise represents a specific type of training stress to the
anatom y and various systems of the body, and adaptations
consequent to anaer obic training are specific to the nature of the
exercise performed. It is also appar ent that an individual’ s age,
nutrition, prior fitness level, and training motiv ation can affect
adaptations. Integration of a training program that has many
components requires careful planning and monitoring to minimiz e
the occurrence of incompatibi lities or overtraining. Explosi ve training
evokes marked increases in muscular power , whereas more
conventional heavy resistance training mainly increases muscle size
and strength. Anaer obic training (resistance, sprint, plyometric,
agility, high-in tensity interv al training) in gener al elicits specific
adaptations in the nervous system leading to greater recruitment,
firing rate (rate coding), and enhanced muscle function that
increases str ength and power .
Anaer obic training also has positive effects on bone, muscle, and
the associated connectiv e tissue; the entire musculosk eletal system
under goes a coordinated adaptation to exercise. Athletes
undertaking strenuous exercise training experience changes in the
force-gener ating capabi lities of muscle, resulting in a coordinated
and proportional increase in the load-bearing capaci ty of bone and
other connectiv e tissue. Anaerobic training can increase skeletal
muscle mass, force-gener ating capabi lity, and metabol ic capacity and
may lead to subtle alterations of the endocrine system that enhance
the tissue r emodel ing pr ocess.
Anaer obic training gener ally results in fewer acute and chronic
responses in the cardiovascular and respiratory systems , although
low-intensi ty, high-volume resistance exercise produces some
responses that are similar to those with aerobic exercise.
Collectively, improved neuromuscular , musculosk eletal, endocrine,
and cardiovascular function contribute to enhanced muscl e strength,
power , hypertr ophy, muscular endur ance, and motor performance—
335
all of which contribute to increased athletic performance. The
adaptations observ ed in athletes are directly related to the quality of
the exercise stimulus and accordingly to the levels of progressive
overload, specificity, and variation incorpor ated into program design.
The scientific basis of program design is ultimately seen in the
effectiveness wi th which the athlete impr oves perf ormance.
KEY TERMS
actin
anaer obic tr aining
bilateral defici t
bilateral facilitation
bone matrix
bone miner al densi ty (BMD)
collagen
cortical bone
cross-education
cross-linking
cross-sectional ar ea (CS A)
detraining
dual-ener gy X-ray absorptiometry (D XA)
elastin
electr omyography (EMG)
exercise-induced muscle damage (EIMD)
fibrous carti lage
hyaline carti lage
hydroxyapatite
hyperplasia
hypertr ophy
mechanical loading
microfibril
minimal essential str ain (MES)
motor uni t
myogenesis
336
myosin
myotatic r eflex
nebul in
neuromuscular junction (NMJ)
osteoblasts
osteogenic stimul i
osteopor osis
peak bone mass
pennation angle
periosteum
procollagen
progressive overload
quanti tative computed tomogr aphy (QCT )
rate–pr essure product
size principle
specificity of loading
stress fractures
structur al exercises
tendon sti ffness
titin
trabecular bone
STUDY QUESTIONS
  1.  Which neuromuscular phenomenon occurs when there is an
increase or maintenance of muscular strength of an untrained
limb when tr aining the contr alater al limb?
  a.  cr oss-education
  b.  bilateral defici t
  c.  ex ercise-induced muscle damage
  d.  maximal v oluntary isometric contr action
  2.  Adaptations to anaer obic training, particularly neuromuscular
system improvements that occur during the early phases of
training, can oc cur in
337
  a.  1 to 4 weeks
  b.  6 to 8 weeks
  c.  10 to 14 weeks
  d.  20 to 24 weeks
  3.  Which of the following  is not one of the motor unit
adaptations to anaer obic tr aining?
  a.  h ypertr ophy of al l types of muscle fibers
  b.  greater synaptic input needed f or re-recruitment
  c.  shi ft of neur on firing f requency to higher r ates
  d.  recruitment of a maximum per centage of a vailable motor
units
  4.  Bone development during anaer obic training requires a
minimal essen tial strain (MES) to trigger the appropriate
adaptations. What is the MES r equired?
  a.  1/2 the f racture force
  b.  1/5 the f racture force
  c.  1/10 the f racture force
  d.  1/15 the f racture force
  5.  Anaer obic tr aining r esults in what muscle fibri llar adaptations?
  a.  Fibers, as a whole, shi ft to become mor e anaer obic.
  b.  Fibers, as a whole, exhibi t no change.
  c.  Fibers, as a whole, shi ft to become mor e aerobic.
  d.  Anaer obic fibers become mor e anaer obic, whi le no change
is observ ed in aer obic fibers.
338