# Chapter 5: Adaptations to Anaerobic Training

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

**PDF Pages:** 281--338

CHAPTER  5
ADAPTATIONS TO
ANAEROBIC TRAINING
Brandon Roberts, PhD, and Sean Collins, PhD
The authors would like to acknowledg e the significant contributions of Duncan French
and Nicholas A. R atamess to this chapter .
After completing this chapter, you will be able to
differentiate between aer obic tr aining adaptations and the
anatomical, ph ysiological, and perf ormance adaptations
following anaer obic tr aining;
discuss the centr al and peripher al neur al adaptations to
anaer obic tr aining;
understand how manipulating the acute tr aining v ariables of a
periodiz ed program can al ter bone, muscle structur e, fiber
types, and connectiv e tissue;
explain the acute and chr onic ef fects of anaer obic tr aining on
the endocrine system;
elucidate the chr onic ef fects of anaer obic tr aining on the
cardiovascular system;
understand the detrimental ef fects as a r esult of periods of
detraining; and
discuss how anaer obic tr aining pr ograms ha ve the potential to
enhance muscular str ength, muscular endur ance, power ,
281
flexibi lity and mobi lity, and motor perf ormance.
Characteriz ed by high-intensi ty, intermi ttent bouts of exercise,
anaerobic training  requires adenosine triphosphate (ATP) to be
regener ated at a faster rate than can be produced by oxidativ e
metabol ism alone. Consequently , the energy requirement relies on a
greater proportion of energy coming from non-o xidati ve energy
systems, which include the phosphagen or creatine phosphate
system and a smaller proportion coming from glycolysis.  Thus, the
term anaer obic training  is used in this text to describe exercise
training that is performed at intensi ties that rely primari ly on non-
oxidativ e metabol ism to meet energy demands. Example  modal ities
include resistance training, plyometric drills, speed agility, and
interv al training. Long-term adaptations that occur in response to
anaer obic training are specifically related to the characteristics of the
training program. For example, improvements in muscular strength,
power , hypertr ophy, muscular endur ance, motor skills, and
coordination are all recogniz ed as beneficial adaptations following
anaer obic training modal ities. Finally, while oxidativ e metabol ism
plays a limited role in regener ating ATP during high-intensi ty
anaer obic activities, it still plays a critical role in the recovery of
energy stores during periods of low-intensi ty exercise (recovery) or
rest (49).
Exercises such as sprints and plyometric drills primari ly stress the
phosphagen system; they are usually less than 10 seconds in
duration and minimiz e fatigue by allowing almost complete recovery
between sets (e.g., 5-7 min). Longer -duration, high-intensi ty,
interv al-type training predom inantly uses energy production from the
glycolytic system, in which shorter rest interv als (e.g., 20-60 s) are
adopted during high-intensi ty exercise. The integr ation of high-
intensi ty exercise with short rest periods is consider ed an important
aspect of anaer obic training, because athletes are often required to
perform near-maximal intens ities under fatigued condi tions during
competi tion. It is, howev er, critical that appropriate anaer obic
282
training be programmed and prescribed in such a way as to optimiz e
the physiolog ical adaptations that determine performance.
Competi tive sport requires the complex interaction of all the energy
systems and demonstr ates how each contributes to a varying extent
to fulfill the global metabol ic demands of competi tion ( table 5.1 ).
A wide variety of physical and physiological adaptations are
reported following anaer obic training, and these chang es enable
individuals to improve athletic performance standar ds (table 5.2).
Adaptations include changes to the nervous, muscular , connectiv e
tissue, endocr ine, and cardiovascular systems. They range from
changes that take place in the early phase of training (e.g., one to
four weeks) to those that take place following many years of
consistent training. The majority of resear ch has typical ly dealt with
adaptations in the early to intermediate stages of training (i.e., 4-24
weeks). Understanding how the individual systems of the human
body respond to physical activity using anaer obic metabol ism
provides a knowledge base from which the strength and condi tioning
professional can plan and predict the outcome of a specific training
program to then focus on effectively influencing individual strengths
and weaknesses.
TABLE 5.1  Primary Metabolic Demands of Various
Sports
Sport Phosphagen system Glycolytic system Aerobic system
American f ootbal l High Moder ate Low
Archery High Low —
Basebal l High Low —
Basketball High Moder ate to high Low
Boxing High High Moder ate
Cricket High Low —
Diving High Low —
Note:  All types of metabol ism ar e involved to some extent in al l activi ties.
283
Sport Phosphagen system Glycolytic system Aerobic system
Fencing High Moder ate —
Field ev ents (athletics) High — —
Field hock ey High Moder ate Moder ate
Golf High — Moder ate
Gymnastics High Moder ate —
Ice hock ey High Moder ate Moder ate
Lacrosse High Moder ate Moder ate
Marathon running Low Low High
Mixed martial arts High High Moder ate
Netbal l Moder ate Moder ate High
Powerl ifting High Low —
Rowing Low Moder ate High
Rugby High High Moder ate
Skiing:
Cross-country Low Low High
Downhi ll High High Moder ate
Soccer (f ootbal l) High Moder ate Moder ate
Strongman High Moder ate to high Low
Swimming:
Short distance High Moder ate —
Long distance Low Moder ate High
Tennis High Moder ate Low
Track (athletics):
Sprints High Moder ate —
Middle distance High High Moder ate
Note:  All types of metabol ism ar e involved to some extent in al l activi ties.
284
Sport Phosphagen system Glycolytic system Aerobic system
Long distance — Moder ate High
Ultraendur ance — — High
Volleybal l High Moder ate —
Water polo High High High
Weightl ifting High High Moder ate
Wrestling High Moder ate Low
Note:  All types of metabol ism ar e involved to some extent in al l activi ties.
TABLE 5.2  Physiological Adaptations to Resistance
Training
Variable Resistance training adaptation
PERFORMANCE
Muscular str ength Increases
Muscular endur ance Increases f or high power output
Aerobic power No change or incr eases sl ightly
Anaer obic power Increases
Rate of f orce production Increases
Vertical jump Improved abi lity
Sprint speed Improves
MUSCLE FIBERS
Fiber cr oss-sectional ar ea Increases
Capillary densi ty No change or decr eases
Mitochondrial densi ty Decreases
Myofibrillar densi ty No change
Myofibrillar volume Increases
Cytoplasmic densi ty Increases
ATP = adenosine triphosphate; A TPase = adenosine triphosphatase.
285
Variable Resistance training adaptation
Myosin hea vy chain pr otein Increases
Ribosomal capaci ty No change or incr eases
Ribosomal ef ficiency No change or incr eases
Myonuclear domain Increases
ENZYME ACTIVITY
Creatine phosphokinase Increases
Myokinase Increases
Phosphof ructokinase Increases
Lactate deh ydrogenase No change or v ariable
Sodium–potassium A TPase Increases
METABOLIC ENERGY STORES
Stored ATP Increases
Stored creatine phosphate Increases
Stored gly cogen Increases
Stored trigly cerides May incr ease
CONNECTIVE TISSUE
Ligament str ength May incr ease
Tendon str ength May incr ease
Collagen content May incr ease
Bone densi ty No change or incr eases
BODY COMPOSITION
% body f at Decreases
Fat-free mass Increases
ATP = adenosine triphosphate; A TPase = adenosine triphosphatase.
286
Neural Adaptations
Many anaer obic training modal ities emphasiz e the expression of
muscular speed and power and depend greatly on optimal neural
recruitment for maximal performance (and high quality of training).
Anaer obic training has the potential to elicit long-term adaptations
throughout the neuromuscular system, beginning in the higher brain
centers and continuing down  to the level of individual muscle fibers
(figure 5.1). Neural adaptations are fundamental to optimizing
athletic performance, and increased neural drive is critical to
maximizing the expression of muscular strength and power .
Augmented neural drive is thought to result in increased agonist
(i.e., the major muscles involved in a specific movement or exercise)
motor unit recruitment and potential ly increased neuronal firing rates
(3, 65, 140, 149). In addition, a reduction in inhibi tory mechanisms
(i.e., from Golgi tendon organs) and antagonist coactiv ation are also
thought to occur with long-te rm training (3, 149). While it is not fully
understood how these compl ex responses coexist, it is appar ent that
neural adaptations typical ly occur before any structur al changes in
skeletal muscle ar e appar ent (167).
287
288
FIGURE 5.1  Potential si tes of adaptation wi thin the neur omuscular system.
Central Adaptations
Increased motor unit activation begins in the higher brain centers,
where the intent to produce maximal levels of muscular force and
power causes motor cortex activity to increase (45). As the level of
force develope d rises, or when a new exercise or movement is being
learned, prima ry motor cortex activity is elevated in an effort to
support the enhanced need for neuromuscular function. Adaptations
to anaer obic training methods are then reflected by substantial
neural changes in the spinal cord, particularly along the descending
corticospinal tracts (4). Indeed, after use of anaer obic training
programs, agonist voluntary activation and the recruitment of high-
threshold motor units has been shown to be elevated in association
with an improved skeletal muscle force production (130) . This is in
comparison to what is seen in untrained individuals (3), in whom the
ability to maximal ly recruit motor units is limited. In those
rehabi litating from injury , electrical stimulation has been shown to be
more effective than voluntary contractions for eliciting strength gains
(41). Other resear ch has shown that only 71% of muscle tissue is
activated during maximal ef forts in untr ained populations (7).
Adaptations of Motor Units
The functional unit of the neuromuscular system is the motor unit.
Consisting of the alpha motor neuron and the muscle fibers that it
activates, a motor unit may innerv ate <10 muscle fibers for small,
intricate muscl es or >100 fibers for large, powerf ul trunk and limb
muscles. To maximiz e the expression of muscle force, large
increases in synaptic input to the motor unit pool are necessary to
cause the recruitment of all available motor units and to drive the
dischar ge rate of these motor units to their optimal frequency . This
association of motor unit recruitment and dischar ge rate modulation
allows for the ability to finely grade muscle force production.
289
Therefore, changes in the firing rate (or dischar ge rate) of the motor
unit also affect muscle force gener ation. With increased motor unit
firing rates, the muscle fibers are continual ly activated by
subsequent action potentials before the fibers have time to
completely relax following a prior action potential. Therefore,
increasing motor unit firing rates enhances the summation of
successiv e muscle twitches, which is expressed as augmented
contractile strength (1). Increases in motor unit firing rates
represent a potential adaptive mechanism that correlates with
improvements in strength in response to resistance training (166).
Gains in maximal strength and power of agonist muscles are
gener ally associated with an increase in recruitment; an increased
rate of firing; greater motor unit synchr onization of neural dischar ge
intra-muscularly , and improved inter-muscle coordination , which is
the learned motor behavior coordinating the activity of multiple
muscles in syner gy during movement (40a, 148); or a combination
of all these f actors.
The recruitment or decrui tment of motor units in an orderly
manner is governed by Henneman’ s size principle  (figure 5.2),
which represents the relationship between motor unit twitch force
and recruitment threshold (140). According to this principle, motor
units are recruited in an ascending order according to their soma
size. Thus, motor units with small motor neurons have lower
recruitment thresholds than do motor units with large motor
neurons. High-thr eshold motor units are gener ally quick to fatigue
but have greater force-producing ability. The recruitment threshold
of a motor unit also determines its firing rate characteristics, and
thus there is an inverse association between motor unit recruitment
threshold and a motor unit’s typical firing rate. This arrangement
provides several advantages, including the ability to precisely
gradate force production—particularly at low levels of force
production— as wel l as enhanced f atigue r esistance (29a, 38a).
290
FIGURE 5.2 Graphic representation of the size principle, according to which motor units
are organized based on the size of the neuronal soma. Low-threshold motor units are
recruited first and have lower force capabilities than higher -threshold motor units. Typical ly,
to get to the high-thr eshold motor units, the body must first recruit the lower -threshold
motor uni ts.
With heavy resistance training, all muscle fibers get larger (158,
159) because for the most part they are all recruited in order to
produce the higher levels of force required to lift progressively
heavier loads. It has similarly been shown that lifting lower loads
near or to volitional failure can promote substantial hypertr ophy of
all fibers, because fatigue similarly demands progressive recruitment
of fibers associated with higher -threshold motor units (121a, 122a).
Maximal force production not only requires the recruitment of a
maximum percentage of available motor units, including the high-
threshold motor units, but also relies on the recruitment occurring at
very high firing frequencies, which promotes summation of muscle
fiber twitch forces and consequently augments the magni tude of
contractile activity. Once a motor unit is recruited, less synaptic input
is needed in order for it to be re-recruited (e.g., its recruitment
threshold decreases) (65). This phenomenon may have important
ramifications for strength and power training, because all motor
291
units, but especial ly high-thr eshold units, may be more readily
reactiv ated subsequent to prior r ecruitment.
In addition to requiring the recruitment of a large number of
available motor units, maximal force production also necessi tates
that these motor units fire at very high frequencies. This rapid firing
promotes summation of the muscle fiber twitch forces, thereby
amplifying the overall contractile activity. Studies have demonstrated
that during maximal force contractions, motor neurons dischar ge at
their highest rates, particularly in the early phases of the contraction
when cortical input is dominant and afferent feedback  from the
muscle is minimal. This is especial ly evident during explosiv e, or
ballistic, contractions when motor units are recruited in a precise,
orderly sequence, with most units activated before a significant rise
in force output. Consequently , even under condi tions demanding
rapid force, the recruitment of motor units adher es to an ordered
pattern that prioritizes high-threshold motor units when  maximum
force is required. This orderly yet rapid recruitment pattern may be a
key factor in developing strength and power , because it enables the
reactiv ation of motor units, especial ly high-thr eshold ones, with
reduced synaptic input after ini tial activ ation (40b).
With heavy resistance training, all muscle fiber s get
larger (i.e., hypertrophy) because more motor units are
recruited to produce high levels of force.
Another critical element of adaptation in neural recruitment is the
level of tissue activation that results from chronic resistance training
for muscle hypertr ophy (26a, 80a). Resear ch has shown that as
muscle hypertr ophies, it does not require as much neural activation
to lift a given submaximal load. Ploutz and colleagues (134) reported
that fewer quadriceps muscle fibers were activated when subjects
lifted a fixed submaximal load following nine weeks of resistance
training, which also caused a 5% increase in muscle size.
Additional ly, following resistance training at high loads (80% 1RM),
292
the neural adaptation is greater, resulting in a lower neural output to
produce the same submaximal force, even with similar hypertr ophy
to low-load (30% 1RM) resistance training (80a). Such results
demonstr ate the importance of progressive overloading during
resistance training and how it promotes the activation of an optimal
amount of muscle tissue to meet f orce production r equirements.
Other motor unit adaptations include changes in the rate and
sequence of firing. A positive relationship exists between the
magni tude of force produced and the rate of motor unit firing; high
firing rates from the onset of ballistic muscle contraction are
especial ly critical to increased rates of force development (3). The
increase in firing rate (vs. recruitment) appears to depend on muscle
size and the number of motor units that compose the muscle, such
that smaller muscles rely more on an increased firing rate to
enhance force production, whereas larger muscles depend more on
recruitment (61). Evidence suggests that anaer obic training can play
a role in enhancing firing rates of recruited motor units (3). For
example, resistance training may result in a more synchr onized
pattern (i.e., the firing of two or more motor units at a fixed interv al)
of activation during the exertion of large forces, rather than the
customary asynchr onous pattern usually common to motor function
(149). Although the specific role of motor unit synchr onization
during anaer obic training remains to be fully elucidated,
synchr onization is potential ly more critical to the rate of force
development and less significant concerning the overall level of force
developed.
Neuromuscular Junc tion
The neuromuscular junction (NMJ)  is the interface between the
nerve and the skeletal muscle fibers, and it represents another
potential site for neural adaptation following anaer obic training (42,
43). Because of the difficulty in investigating this structur e, most
studies examining the NMJ have used animal models to demonstr ate
its adaptation to exercise. Deschenes and colleagues (44) examined
293
the impact of high-intensi ty versus low-intensi ty treadmi ll exercise
training on NMJ in the soleus muscle of rats. Following both high-
and low-intens ity running, the total area of the NMJ was found to
increase. High-intensi ty training, howev er, resulted in more
dispersed, irregular -shaped synapses and a greater total length of
nerve terminal branching compar ed to low-intensi ty training. In
another study, greater end-p late perimeter length and area, as well
as greater dispersion of acetylchol ine receptors within the end-plate
region, were also found after seven weeks of resistance training
(43). These adaptations suggest that anaer obic training induces
beneficial morphological changes in the NMJ that are conduciv e to
enhanced neur al transmission capabi lities.
Neuromuscular Reflex Potentiation
Anaer obic training causes positive changes in the reflex (i.e., muscle
spindle or stretch reflex) response of the neuromuscular system and
enhances the magni tude and rate of force development via this
reflex. This myotatic reflex  also harnesses the involuntary elastic
properties of the muscle and connectiv e tissue (e.g., the series
elastic component) and acts to positively increase force production.
Resistance training in particu lar has been shown to increase reflex
potentiation by between 19% and 55% (5). Furthermor e, resistance-
trained athletes (e.g., weightl ifters and bodybui lders) are found to
have greater reflex potentiat ion in the soleus muscle compared to
untrained individuals (143).
Anaerobic Training and Electromyography
Studies
Electromyography (EMG)  is a common resear ch tool used to
examine the magni tude of neural activation within skeletal muscle.
Two kinds of EMG are commonly used in resear ch and applied
settings: surface EMG and intramuscular (needle or fine wire) EMG.
Surface EMG requires the placement of adhesiv e electr odes on the
surface of the skin where they can monitor a large area of
294
underlying muscle (131). Surface EMG is often more effective for
monitoring superficial muscle , because it is unable to detect deeper
muscle activity. Also, the more body fat an individual has, the
weaker the EMG signal will be because body fat acts as a low-pass
filter. In comparison, with intramuscular EMG, the skin surface is
numbed, and a needle electrode, or a needle containing two fine-
wire electrodes, is inserted through the skin and positioned into the
belly of the muscle itself. Fine-wire electr odes emphasiz e a specificity
of assessment in that they are located in a muscle of interest and
accurately record localized motor unit action potentials (75). Because
of its invasiveness, intramuscular EMG is primari ly adopted in
resear ch settings or under clinical condi tions. While it is often
difficult to determine the specific underpinning mechanism(s) (i.e.,
increased recruitment, discharge rate, or synchr onizat ion; Golgi
tendon organ inhibi tion) affecting EMG output, an increase in EMG
signal indicates gr eater neur omuscular activi ty.
An important consider ation when examining the neuromuscular
system is an individual’ s training status. Neural adaptations
(impr oved motor learning and coordination) predominate in the early
phase of training without substantial concomi tant increases in
muscle hypertr ophy (61). It appears that as an individual’ s training
status advances, an interpla y exists between neural and
hypertr ophic mechanisms that contribute to further gains in strength
and power .
Sale reported that dramatic increases in neural adaptation take
place in the early part of a training program (6-10 weeks) (140). As
the duration of training increases (>10 weeks), when muscle
hypertr ophy becomes more observ able, it is these structur al changes
that contribute  to strength and power gains more than neural
adaptations (40c). Eventual ly, muscle hypertr ophy plateaus as an
accommodation to the training load occurs. Howev er, at that time, if
an athlete incorpor ates new variation or progressive overload into
the training plan, neural adaptations will once again contribute to
the performance improvements by acting to tolerate the new
295
physical insult from training. This pattern is replicated with every
stepwise chang e in the training demand, and as athletes progress in
training, the type of program used may be one of the most
important factors to consider (72). Neural factors are especial ly
important for strength gains in programs that use very high training
intensi ties (>80% 1RM) (80a).
Electr omyography studies have also yielded some interesting
findings r egarding neur al adaptations to anaer obic tr aining:
Exercising muscle under going unilateral resistance training
produces increased strength and neural activity in the
contralater al resting muscle, a phenomenon known as cross-
education  (79). A literature review has shown that strength
in the untrained limb may increase up to 22%, with an
average strength increase of approximately 8% following
training periods ranging from 4 to 12 weeks (125). The
increase in strength of the untrained limb is accompanied by
greater EMG activity in that limb (154), thereby suggesting
that a central neural adaptation accounts for most of the
strength gains, considering no change or reduction in the
cross-sectional area (CSA)  of muscle during the unilateral
training period (22, 139).
Unilateral strength, via cross-education, increases even when
limbs are trained at different intensi ties and during detraining
periods (22). The cross-education effect does appear to be
load dependen t, with untrained limb strength improving when
the contralater al trained limb performs higher -load (8RM-
12RM) intensi ties (22). Furthermor e, the untrained limb
strength improvements will also benefi t if the untrained limb
performs low-load (30RM-40RM) work while the trained limb
performs high-load (8RM-12RM) synchr onously , but not if the
trained limb performs traditional unilateral work under low-
load intensi ties (30RM-40RM) (22).
In untrained individuals, a bilateral deficit  is evident. The
force produced when both limbs contract together is lower
296
than the sum of the forces they produce when contracting
unilaterally. Resear ch has shown that the corresponding EMG
activity is lower during bilateral contractions (61), sugge sting
that neural mechanisms are, at least in part, a contributing
factor. With longitudinal bilateral training, the magni tude of the
bilateral deficit is reduced. In fact, trained or stronger
individuals often show a bilateral facilitation  effect whereby
an increase in voluntary activation of the agonist muscle
groups is observ ed during bi lateral contr action (64a).
The EMG activity of antagoni st muscle groups has been shown to
change in response to anaer obic training during agonist movements.
In most instan ces, cocontr action of antagonist muscles serves as a
protectiv e mechanism to increase joint stability and reduce the risk
of injury (96). Howev er, when too much antagonist activity opposes
agonist movement, it inappr opriately diminishes net force production
at a joint.
A number of studies have shown reduced antagonist coactiv ation
following resistance training, resulting in an increase in net force
without an increase in agonist motor unit recruitment (71, 130).
Sprint and plyometric training have also been shown to alter the
timing of coactiv ation (86), although the specific role of altering
antagonist coactiv ation patterns remains unclear . Greater antagonist
activity may be observ ed during ballistic movements that require
high levels of joint stability or when people are unfamiliar with a task
and require more inherent stability (48). Antagonist activity has been
reported to increase during unstable exercise activity with
subsequent reduction in agonist activity (19, 144). Behm and
colleagues (19) demonstr ated that completing leg exten sion while
seated on a Swiss ball (i.e., an unstable surface) resulted in 44%
lower quadriceps activation but 29% greater hamstring activation
when compar ed to a stable condi tion. Thus, leg extension forces
were 70% lower in unstable than stable condi tions.
Similarly, Santana and colleagues (144) demonstr ated that
pressing in a stable (bench press) versus unstable (standing cable
297
press) position requires an increase in antagonist, syner gist, and
core stabilization activation during the unstable condi tion. In
contrast, agonist activation is greater during the stable condi tion
with little effect on antagonis t activation. The changes in agonist and
antagonist activation result in the attenuation of force production. It
has been shown that strength (1RM) performance is decreased in an
unstable free-weight squat compar ed to a stable free-weight squat
(116). Similarly, peak force (N) and rate of force developm ent (RFD)
have also been found to be significantly reduced during unstable
squat ting versus stable squat ting (115). Additional ly, when
considering the type of instabi lity appar atus, individual training
status may be an important consider ation. For example, among
highly resistance-tr ained individuals, appar atuses that create
moder ate instability (e.g., Swiss ball, Dyna disc, and wobble board)
did not substantial ly alter muscle activation. It is possible that this
finding could be due to the highly trained individuals’ familiarity and
experience with unstable training condi tions, but this is a hypothesis
that must be tested (171).
298
Muscular Adaptations
Skeletal muscl e adaptations  following anaer obic training occur in
both structur e and function,  with reported changes encompassing
increases in fiber size, fiber type transitions, and enhanced
biochemical and ultrastructur al components (i.e., muscle
architectur e, enzyme activity, and substr ate conce ntrations).
Collectively, these adaptations result in enhanced performance
characteristics that include strength, power , and muscular
endur ance, al l of which ar e critical to athletic suc cess.
Muscular Growth
Muscle hypertrophy  is the term given to the enlargement of
muscle fiber cross-sectional area (CSA) following training. A positive
relationship exists between  hypertr ophy and the expression of
muscular strength (162). Biological ly, the process of hypertr ophy
involves an increase in the net accretion (i.e., an increase in
synthesis, reduction in degradation, or both) of the contractile
proteins actin  and myosin  within the myofibril, as well as an
increase in the number of myofibrils within a muscle fiber. In
addition to these contractile proteins, other structur al proteins such
as titin and nebulin  are also synthesiz ed proportionately to the
myofilament changes. The new myofilaments are added to the
periphery of the myofibril and result in an increase in its diameter .
The cumulativ e effect of these additions is an enlargement of the
fiber and, collectively, the size of the muscle or muscle group itself.
During exposur e to mechanical loading (e.g., resistance training), a
series of intracellular processes regulate gene expression and
subsequently pr omote incr eased pr otein synthesis (138).
Mechanical deformation of muscle stimulates various proteins
independent of hormone concentr ations, and these proteins have
been shown to increase in activity before evidence of muscle
hypertr ophy appears. In particular , mechanical tissue deformation
activates the protein kinase B (Akt)–mammal ian target of rapam ycin
299
(mTOR) pathway, the adenosine monophosphate– activated protein
kinase (AMPK) pathway, and the mitogen- activated protein kinase
(MAPK) pathway. Of these, the Akt/mT OR pathway in particular is
important in directly regulating adaptations to resistan ce training
(18, 45). When muscle fibers contract, Akt/mT OR signal ing increases
dramatical ly, and this response is critical for increasing muscle
protein synthesis and subsequent growth (a process known as
myogenesis ). At the same time, the downr egulation of inhibi tory
growth factors (e.g., myostatin) suggests that resistanc e exercise
significantly affects a plethor a of growth-signal ing and breakdown
pathways (23, 87, 89, 145). Protein synthetic rates are elevated after
acute resistance exercise and remain elevated for up to 48 hours
(109, 133). The magni tude of increased protein synthesis depends
on a variety of factors including whether someone is trained or
untrained, carboh ydrate and protein intake, amino acid availability,
timing of nutrient intake, mechanical stress of the workout, muscle
cell hydration levels, and the anabol ic hormonal and subsequent
receptor r esponse (14 , 36, 91).
The process of hypertrophy involves both an increase in
the synthesis of the contractile proteins actin and
myosin within the myofibril and an increase in the
number of myofibrils within the muscle fiber itself. The
new myofilaments are added to the external layers of
the myofibril, increasing its diameter.
Exercise-induced muscle damage (EIMD)  and disruption  of
myofibrils and the uniform structur e of muscle fiber sarcomer es
following high-intensi ty anaer obic training (e.g., resistance training)
also have a marked effect on muscle growth (35). The initial
resistance exercise-induced stress in untrained individua ls disrupts
muscle homeostasis, leading to morphological change s such as
cytosk eletal disturbances (e.g., Z-band streaming); loss of
sarcomeric structur al proteins (e.g., desmin and dystrophin);
300
segmental necrosis of muscle fibers; and alterations in connectiv e
tissue, T-tubules, and the sarcoplasmic reticulum. These
morphological changes can result directly from mechan ical stress
during exercise or subsequently from calcium-sensi tive degradation
pathways and inflammatory responses. EIMD damage is most
pronounced after the first resistance training session and diminishes
rapidly as training continues, becoming negligible after 10 weeks of
consistent resistance training (27, 37). The structur al changes
associated with EIMD influence gene expression in an effort to
strengthen muscle tissue and protect it from further damage. The
repair and remodel ing process itself may involve a host of regulatory
mechanisms (e.g., hormonal, immune, and metabol ic) that interact
with the training status of the individual (90). Howev er, it is
understood that both the inflammatory responses and increased
protein turno ver (i.e., increased net protein synthesis)  ultimately
contribute to long-term hypertr ophic adaptations. The sequence of
protein synthesis involves (a) water uptak e, (b) noncontr actile
protein synthe sis, and (c) contractile protein synthesis (166). At the
same time, reduced degradation acts to maintain the size of fibers
by reducing net pr otein loss.
After the initiation of a heavy resistance training program,
changes in the type of muscle proteins (e.g., fast myosin heavy
chains) start to take place within several workouts (158). Howev er,
muscle fiber hypertr ophy requires a longer period of training (3-4
weeks of 9-12 workouts) before significant changes in CSA become
detectable (40, 150). The hypertr ophic process leading to a rise in
CSA will have been occurrin g molecularly since the initial training
stimulus, but is only observ able when those alterations become
measur able. As with initial gains in performance variables (e.g.,
strength and power), hypertr ophic responses are at their greatest in
the early stages, after which the rate of muscle growth diminishes
over time (72). Athletes studied across two years of heavy resistance
training showed increases in strength that paralleled optimal training
301
intensi ties, although muscle fiber hypertr ophy contributed little to
increased l ifting perf ormance (72).
The magni tude of hypertr ophy ultimately depends on the training
stimulus and how the acute training variables are prescribed. To
optimiz e muscle growth, appropriate training periodization is
essential for maximizing the combination of mechanical and
metabol ic stimul i. Mechanical factors include the lifting of heavy
loads or low to moder ate loads at near-momentary muscular failure,
with or without the inclusion of eccentric muscle actions (159a), and
moder ate to high training volumes (95), all of which are
characteristic of typical resistance training prescriptions for muscle
strength and hypertr ophy. An increasing amount of evidence also
supports the use of novel training modal ities (e.g., occlusion
training) as alternativ e methods of inducing appropriate mechanical
or metabol ic stress. Metabol ic factors center on low- to moder ate-
intensi ty or moder ately high-intensi ty training with high volumes and
short rest interv als (characteristic of bodybui lding training) (39,
136). Collectively, mechanical factors result in optimal recruitment of
muscle fibers (because muscle fibers need to be recruited before
growth), growth factor expression, and potential disruption to the
sarcomer es, all of which increase muscle CSA (63). The metabol ic
factors stress the glycolytic energy system and result in increased
metabol ites that may be involved in muscle growth. These programs
also el icit the most potent anabol ic hormone r esponse (96).
Also proposed as a mechanism for increasing muscle size, and
something that has been debated by exercise scientists for years, is
hyperplasia. Hyperplasia  is the term given to an increase in the
number of muscle fibers via longitudinal fiber splitting in response to
high-intensi ty resistance training. Hyperplasia has been shown to
occur in animals (13, 64, 77), but the findings are controversial in
humans, with some studies supporting (108, 111, 114, 165) and
others rejecting its occurrence in humans (110). Part of the reason
for this confusion may arise from cross-sectional studies comparing
resistance-tr ained athletes to untrained individuals, showing a
302
greater number of fibers in trained populations. In this scenario it is
difficult to determine if the difference is due to preexisting,
pretraining differences in fiber number (i.e., due to genetics) or due
to training-induced hyperplasia. One must also consider that the
procedur es scientists perform on animals simply cannot be
completed in humans for ethical and logistical reasons.
Consequently , some of the more convincing data supporting skeletal
muscle hyperplasia emerge from animal studies (64, 77). When
examining hyperplasia in animal models, resear chers remove whole
muscle and strip back the fascia in order to analyz e muscle fiber
numbers longitudinal ly under a microscope. In humans, removal of
whole muscle is not feasible. Instead, needle biopsy techniques are
used to harvest a small sample of muscle tissue, which is then
examined in cross section, and fiber number calculations are
performed indirectly using extrapolation mathematics. While
hyperplasia cannot be completely ruled out, it does not appear to be
a major  strategy for muscle tissue adaptation to resistance training,
and, if it occurs at all, it involves only a small amount of the added
tissue (maybe less than 10%) if the condi tions are optim al. It may
be hypothesiz ed that if hyperplasia occurs, it may be in response to
muscle fibers reaching a theoretical upper limit in size, which may
occur in athletes using anabol ic steroids and other growth agents or
under going long-term training that produces large to extreme levels
of hypertr ophy. This remains to be fully elucidated and continues to
be an ar ea of contention among scienti fic resear chers.
Fiber Type–Specific Size Changes
The magnitude of muscle  hypertr ophy experienced following
anaer obic training is associated with muscle fiber type. Muscle fibers
must be activated in order to promote significant hypertr ophy (38).
During resistan ce training, both type I and type II muscle fibers
have the poten tial to be recruited, and only via activation do type I
or type II fibers receive a signal ing mechanism that initiates the
cascade of regulatory processes promoting protein synthesis.
303
Because there is an appar ent alignment of the functional
characteristics of fiber types (e.g., fiber size, force capaci ty, and
fatigue resista nce) and motor unit properties, such that in mixed
muscles low-threshold moton eurons typical ly innerv ate type I fibers
and high-thr eshold motoneur ons innerv ate type II fibers, it is
necessary that high-f orce and/or high-f atigue condi tions are used to
maximiz e phenotypic adaptations across all fiber types. Accordingly ,
significant and consistent activation via a consistent training stimulus
at appropriate volume is necessary for the initiation  of these
adaptiv e processes to translate to significant hypertrophy as
observ ed by enlarged CSA of the intact muscle. Typical ly, type II
fibers manifest greater increases in size than type I fibers; thus the
magni tude of hypertr ophy is not uniform between the two major
fiber types (68). In fact, it has been argued that the ultimate
potential for hypertr ophy may reside in the relative proportion of
type II fibers within a given athlete’ s muscles (165). That is, athletes
who possess a relatively large proportion of fast-twitch fibers may
have a greater potential for increasing muscle mass than individuals
possessing pr edominantly slow -twitch fibers.
Fiber Type Transitions
The pattern of neural stimulation dictates the extent to which fiber
type adaptatio ns occur following anaer obic training. Muscle fibers
are theoretically positioned on a continuum from the least oxidativ e
to the most oxidativ e type (see figure 5.3 and the description of
muscle fiber types in chapter 1). The continuum is as follows: IIx,
IIax, IIa, IIac, IIc, Ic, and I, with a concomi tant myosin heavy chain
(MHC) expression (i.e., MHC IIx, IIa, and I) (11, 157). Although the
proportions of type I and II fibers are partial ly genetical ly
determined (132, 154a), changes within each subtype can occur
following anaer obic training. With training and activation of the high-
threshold motor units, a transition from type IIx to IIa fiber type
occurs (26). In other words, type IIx muscle fibers change their
myosin adenosine triphosphatase (ATPase) isoform content and
304
progressively become more oxidativ e IIa fibers. In fact, resear ch has
shown nearly full transitions from type IIx to IIa fiber profiles
following the combination of high-intensi ty resistance and aerobic
endur ance tr aining (94).
FIGURE 5.3 Muscle fiber transitions occur during training, and these changes are not
influenced by sex (17, 158). This means that a shift of the type of myosin adenosine
triphosphatase (ATPase) and heavy chains takes place during training. Transformations from
IIx to IIax to IIa can be seen, and then small percentages change to IIac and IIc. Exercise
activities that recruit motor units with type IIx muscle fibers initiate a shift toward IIa
fibers.
On consistent activation, type IIx fibers change into a more
oxidativ e form along the continuum (i.e., to an intermediate fiber
type IIax and then to a IIa) (26). Any change in the muscle fiber
type continuum and associate d MHCs occurs in the early stages of a
resistance training program. In an early study, Staron and colleagues
(158) examined the effects of a high-intensi ty resistance training
protocol (multiple sets of the squat, leg press, and knee extension
exercises using 6RM to 12RM loads and 2-min rest periods)
performed by men and wome n two times per week for eight weeks.
They reported a significant decrease in the type IIx percentage in
women after just two weeks of training (four workouts) and in the
men after four weeks of training (eight workouts). Over the eight-
week training program, type IIx fiber types decreased from
approximately 18% to about 7% of the total muscle fibers in both
men and women. Analysis of the MHCs showed that in this early
phase of training, the proportion of IIx MHCs shifted toward IIa
MHCs. Interestingly , detraining has the opposi te effect, resulting in
an increase in type IIx fibers and a reduction in type IIa fibers (132),
with a possible overshoot of type IIx fibers (i.e., higher IIx
305
percentages than observ ed pretraining [11]). While transformation
within muscle fiber subtypes appears typical, transformation from
type I to type II or vice versa appears less probable, most likely due
to differing MHC isoforms and relative oxidativ e enzyme content
(132). Whether these transformations are possible remain s doubtf ul,
because insufficient evidence is currently available. These
possibi lities need to be explor ed in future studies; it is intriguing to
consider whether the continuum of adaptations extends beyond type
I and II subpopulations, especial ly in extreme cases in which a
marathon runner (high percentage of type I fibers) follows a high-
intensi ty resistance training program or a powerl ifter (high
percentage of type II fibers) begins an extensiv e aerobic endur ance
training pr ogram.
Structural and Architectural Changes
Pennate muscle has fascicles that attach obliquely (in a slanted
position) to its tendon. Pennation angle  affects the force
production capabi lities as well as the range of motion of a muscle.
Larger pennation angles can also accommodate greater protein
deposi tion and allow for greater increases in CSA (2). In pennate
muscle, resistance training has been shown to increase the angle of
pennation, with strength-tr ained athletes displa ying larger pennation
angles in the triceps brachii and vastus lateralis muscles compar ed to
untrained individuals (2). Additional ly, fascicle length has been
shown to be greater in strength-tr ained athletes (84), and fascicle
length of the gastrocnemius and vastus lateralis has been found to
be greater in sprinters compar ed to distance runners  (6). The
combination of resistance, sprint, and jump training have been
shown to increase rectus femoris fascicle length, and sprint and
jump training have been shown to increase vastus lateralis fascicle
length (24). These architectural changes have a positive effect on
the manner in which force is ultimately transmi tted to tendons and
bones.
306
Other Muscular Adaptations
Resistance training has been shown to increase myofibrillar volume
(107), cytoplasmic density (111), sarcoplasmic reticulum and T-
tubule density (9), sodium–potassium ATPase activity (67), and
increased ribosome biogenes is (54, 172). Collectively, these changes
act to facilitate hypertr ophy and enable greater expression of
muscular strength. Sprint training has been shown to enhance
calcium release  (129), which assists in increasing speed and power
production b y promoting actin and m yosin cr ossbridge f ormation.
Heavy resistance training has also been shown to reduce
mitochondrial density (112). While the number of mitochondria
remains constant or can slightly increase throughout a training
phase, mitochondrial density is expressed relative to muscle area.
Increases in muscle CSA occur disproportionately to mitochondrial
proliferation, and consequently , the density of mitochondria per unit
volume is typical ly found to decrease with hypertr ophy. Muscle
hypertr ophy can result in decreased capillary density by similar
mechanisms, again with the number of capillaries per fiber
increasing somewhat (168, 184). Bodybui lding workouts produce
large hydrogen ion concentr ations, but having more capillaries per
fiber may assist in the clearance of metabol ites from exercising
muscle (93, 164).
Anaer obic exercise results in substantial reductions in muscle and
blood pH (32), with several mechanisms regulating a change in
acid–base balance during exercise. With adaptations to consistent
acute changes in pH during training (i.e., increased H+
concentr ation), buffering capaci ty can improve. This increased
capaci ty then allows an athlete to better tolerate the accumulation of
H+ within the working muscle , resulting in delayed fatigue and
greater muscular endur ance (152). By its nature, high-intensi ty
interv al training (e.g., sprints and cycling) performed above the
lactate threshold has been shown to significantly increase buffering
capaci ty by 16% to 38% (21, 152). Elsewher e, athletes competing in
anaer obic team sports have been shown to have higher buffering
307
capaci ty than endur ance athletes and untrained control subjects
(52).
Within skeletal muscle, substr ate content and enzyme  activity
represent additional areas of adaptation in response to anaer obic
training. Most notably , when ATP and creatine phosphate (CP)
concentr ations are repeatedly exhausted following bouts of
intermi ttent high-intensi ty muscular contraction, the storage capaci ty
of these high-ener gy compounds is increased  via a
super compensation effect. MacDougal l and colleagues (113)
reported a 28% increase in resting CP and an 18% increase in ATP
concentr ations following five months of resistance training  (i.e., 3 to
5 sets of 8-10 repetitions with 2-min rest periods). In addition, it
appears that bodybui lding-st yle programs such as this, which stress
fast glycolysis, may also be a potent stimulus for the enhancement
of gly cogen content, which w as found to incr ease up to 112% (113).
308
Connective Tissue Adaptations
Bones, tendons, ligaments, fascia, and cartilage are examples of
connectiv e tissue. Anaer obic exercise imparts mechanical forces that
cause deformation of specific regions of the skeleton. These forces,
created by muscular actions  on the tendinous insertion into bone,
can be bending, compr essive, or torsional. In response to
mechanical loading , osteoblasts  migrate to the bone surface
and begin bone model ing (figure 5.4). Osteoblasts manuf acture and
secrete proteins—primari ly collagen molecules—that are deposi ted in
the spaces between bone cells to increase strength. These proteins
form the bone matrix  and eventual ly become miner alized as
calcium phosph ate crystals (hydroxyapatite ). New bone formation
occurs predominantly on the outer surface of the bone
(periosteum ), incr easing diameter and str ength.
309
FIGURE 5.4 Bone modeling in response to mechanical loading.  (a) Application of a
longitudinal weight -bearing force causes the bone to bend (as depicted by the dotted line),
creating a stimulus for new bone formation at the regions experiencing the greatest
deformation.  (b) Osteoblasts lay down additional collagen fibers at the site. (c) Previously
dormant osteoblasts migrate to the area experiencing the strain. (d) The collagen fibers
become miner alized, and the bone diameter ef fectively incr eases.
Genera l Bone Physiology
The rate of bone adaptation occurs differently in the axial (skull-
cranium, vertebr al column, ribs, and sternum) and appendicular
(shoulder girdle, pelvis, and bones of the upper and lower
extremities) skeleton, owing to differing amounts of trabecular
(spongy) bone  and cortical  (compact) bone . Cortical bone is
dense and forms a compact outer shell surrounding the trabecular
bone, with the two types of bone linked by interlocking narrow and
delicate plates of trabecular bone. The spaces between the
310
trabecular plates are occupied by bone marrow that consists of
adipose tissue and blood products such as immatur e red blood cells.
Blood vessels from the marrow cavity extend into the dense cortical
bone through a network of vertical and horizontal canals. Because it
is less dense  and has a greater surface area–to–mass ratio,
trabecular bone is able to respond more rapidly to stimul i than
cortical bone because it is softer , weaker, and more flexible and
therefore mor e inclined to adaptiv e change.
The term minimal essential strain (MES)  refers to the
threshold stimulus that initiates new bone formation. Consistently
exceeding these thresholds signals osteoblasts to migrate to the
region experie ncing the stress and to form bone, while forces that
fall below the MES do not present an appropriate stimul us for new
bone formation. Bone cells work to regulate the formation of new
bone tissue such that forces experienced on a regular basis do not
exceed the MES, thereby establishing a margin of safety against
fracture. Strain register ed by bone is a function of the force per unit
area of bone (stress). The MES is thought to be approximately 1/10
of the force required to fracture bone. Increasing the diameter of
bone allows the force to be distributed over a larger surface area,
thereby decreasing the amount of mechanical stress. Following bone
growth, a force that previous ly exceeded the MES will now be below
the MES threshold. Progressive weight -bearing physical activities
that gener ate forces exceeding the MES are therefore the most
effective at incr easing bone siz e and str ength.
Forces that reach or exceed a threshold stimulus initiate
new bone formation in the area experiencing  the
mechanical strain.
Anaerobic Training and Bone Growth
As muscular strength and hypertr ophy increase in response to
anaer obic training modal ities, the forces gener ated by the increased
muscle contractions subsequ ently increase the mechanical stress on
311
bone, and the bone itself must increase in mass and strength to
provide an adequate support structur e. Any increase in muscle
strength or mass may therefore result in a corresponding increase in
bone mineral density (BMD) , or the quanti ty of miner al
deposi ted in a given area of the bone (93). Interestingly , inactivi ty or
immobi lization has the opposi te effect and results in a more rapid
rate of loss of bone matrix and BMD (155). Numer ous studies have
shown a positive correlation between BMD and muscle strength and
mass (135, 174).
Resear chers have reported that resistance-tr ained athletes have
higher BMD than age-matched sedentary control subjects (12, 29).
In some individuals (e.g., professional soccer players), physical
activity seems to influence bone mass, area, and width more than
BMD (174). Thus, exercise that stimulates muscle hypertr ophy and
strength gains also appears to stimulate bone growth. BMD is a key
indicator of bone strength, but it does not encompass other crucial
aspects of bone quality such as microarchitectur e, geometry , and
turno ver. While dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA)  is the
most common ly used clinical tool for measuring BMD, it fails to
assess these additional factors that contribute to overall bone
quality. Consequently , there is increasing interest in emplo ying other
bone imaging techniques, such as quantitative computed
tomography (QCT) , to evaluate bone microarchitectur e (105).
QCT is advantageous because it differentiates between cortical and
trabecular bone compartments, highlighting their respectiv e
contributions to bone strength. For example, after a six-month
resistance training program, older women showed significant
increases in cortical bone density at the tibia and radius shaft
regions using QCT, even though no significant changes were
observ ed in DXA measur ements (105). More resear ch is needed to
determine the best methods to increase bone strength, especial ly in
young heal thy adul ts.
Quanti tatively, the time course for bone adaptations is rather long
in most cases— approximately six months (28) or longer (102)— and
312
depends on the structur e of the training program. For example, an
18-month resistance training program in middle- aged and older men
led to significant increases in section modulus, a measur e of bone
strength, as well as CSA and areal BMD (aBMD) at the femoral neck,
as assessed by QCT (102). Howev er, adaptation begins within the
first few workouts. The process of osteogenesis involves secretion of
substances into the blood (substances specific to bone only) that can
be measur ed. Therefore, any elevation in an osteogenic marker can
be recogniz ed as an early indicator of bone formation and
presumably a precursor to increased BMD, provided that the
stimulus is maintained o ver a long tr aining period.
Principles of Training to Increase Bone
Strength
Anaer obic training programs that have the objectiv e to stimulate
bone growth need to incorp orate specificity of loading, speed and
direction of loading, sufficient volume, appropriate exercise
selection, progressive overload, and variation (30). Specificity of
loading  deman ds the use of exercises that directly load the
particular region of interest of the skeleton. If the body interpr ets
these forces as new or novel, they will stimulate bone growth in the
area that is receiving the strain. For example, running may be a
good stimulus for increased BMD in the femur but the wrong choice
for promoting miner al deposi ts when one is trying to strengthen the
wrist. The concept of specificity of loading becomes particularly
important when a strength and condi tioning professional prescribes
exercises to increase bone mass in regions of the skeleton most
commonly affected by osteoporosis —a disease in which BMD and
bone mass become reduced to critically low levels. Resear ch
indicates that high-impact cyclical loading exercises for the lower
body, such as gymnastics (161), volleybal l, or basketball (47),
selectiv ely increase BMD at clinically relevant sites such as the hip
and spine more than lower -impact activities do. Additional ly,
increases in BMD may be seen in highly trained college athletes
313
already possessing high levels of BMD. These changes in BMD are
independent of reproductiv e hormonal status if the stimulus is
sufficient (161).
Exercise select ion is critical when one is trying to elicit maximal
osteogenic stimuli  (factors that stimulate new bone formation). In
essence, exercises should involve multiple joints, should direct the
force vectors primari ly through the spine and hip (i.e., structural
exercises ), and should apply external loads heavier than those with
single-joint assistance exercises. Cussler and colleagues (34) showed
a positive linear relationship between the amounts of weight lifted
over the course of a training  year and associated increases in BMD.
In addition, the findings of this resear ch highlighted the importance
of exercise specificity in that the squat, compar ed to seated leg
press, was more effective for increasing BMD in the trochan ter of the
femur (34). The use of single-joint, machine-based exercises should
be limited, because these exercises isolate a single muscle group by
using equipment as suppo rt to stabilize the body rather than
promoting skeletal support. Therefore, exercises such as the back
squat, power clean, deadl ift, snatch, and push jerk (for the axial
skeleton and lower body) and the shoulder press (for the upper
body) are recommended as more effective methods for increasing
bone str ength when indicated.
Because bone responds favorably to mechanical forces, the
principle of progressive overload —progressively placing greater
than normal demands on the exercising musculatur e—applies when
one is training to increase bone mass (66, 170). Although the
maximal strength of bone is maintained well above the voluntary
force capabi lities of the associated musculatur e, bone responds to
higher forces (e.g., 1RM to 10RM loads) that are repetitively applied
over time. The adaptiv e response of bone ensur es that forces do not
exceed a critical level that increases the risk of stress fractures
(microfractures in bone due to structur al fatigue). Support for
progressive overload comes from studies that have compar ed BMD
of various groups of athletes to that of nonathletes (47). In fact,
314
elite adolescent weightl ifters have been found to possess levels of
bone miner alization that far exceed values found in untrained adults
(29, 81). This observ ation is interesting because it indicates that
young bone may be more responsiv e to osteogenic stimul i than
matur e bone. Evidence indicates that physical activity during growth
modulates the external geometry and trabecular architectur e of
bone, potential ly enhancing skeletal strength (74). Evidence has
shown that physical activity–associated bone loading during skeletal
growth (i.e., adolescence) and after skeletal growth (i.e., early
adulthood) elevates peak bone mass  and is positively associated
with adul t bone mass in later l ife (83, 160).
Another important consider ation in the design of programs to
stimulate new bone formation is training variation. The internal
architectur e of the human skeleton has a mechanism through which
it comp ensates for new strain patterns experienced by the bone. To
optimal ly dissipate the impos ed forces, the direction of the collagen
fibers within the bone matrix may change to conform to the lines of
stress experien ced by the bone. Thus, changing the distribution (and
direction) of the force vectors by using a variety of exercises
continual ly presents a unique stimulus f or new bone f ormation wi thin
a given region  of bone. Subsequently , collagen formation occurs in
multiple directions, increasing bone strength in various directions.
Overall, if the magni tude of the load or the rate of force application
is sufficient, it is not typical ly necessary to perform more than a total
of 30 to 35 repetitions, because a greater volume of loading is not
likely to provide any additional stimulus for bone growth (58, 69,
160).
The compone nts of mechanical load that stimulate  bone
growth are the magnitude of the load (intensity), rate
(speed) of loading, direction of the forces, and the
volume of loading (number of repetitions).
315
How Can Athletes Stimulate Bone
Formation?
Select multijoint, compound exercises that involve many muscle groups at
once.
Select some exercises that direct axial force vectors through the spine and
hip.
Use both heavy-load exercises and ballistic or high-impact exercises to
expose the bone to di fferent intensi ties of f orce.
Use multidirectional movements that incorpor ate all planes of motion to
stimulate gr owth in di fferent ar eas of the bone.
Use the principle of progressive overload to stress the musculosk eletal system
and continue to progressively increase load as the tissues become
accustomed to the stimulus.
Adaptations of Tendons,  Ligaments, and
Fascia to Anaerobic Training
Tendons, ligaments, fascia, and cartilage are complex and dynamic
structur es that are the critical link between muscles and bones. The
primary structur al component of all connectiv e tissue is the
collagen  fiber (type I for bone, tendon, and ligaments and type II
for cartilage; figure 5.5). The parent protein, procollagen , is
synthesiz ed and secreted by fibroblasts, which are the most common
cells found in the connectiv e tissue of animals and act as stem cells
in the synthesis of the extracellular matrix, as well as playing a
critical r ole in wound heal ing.
Procollagen molecules consist of three protein strands twisted
around each other in a triple helix. Procollagen leaves the cell with
protectiv e extensions on the ends to prevent prematur e collagen
formation. Cleavage of the extensions via enzymes results in the
formation of active collagen that aligns with other collagen
molecules to form a long filament. Measur ement of these enzymes
provides an indication of collagen metabol ism. In fact, enzyme levels
increase in response to training, thereby showing increased net type
316
I collagen synthesis (103). The parallel arrangement of filaments is
called a microfibril . Collagen has a striated (striped) appear ance
under a light microscope, somewhat like skeletal muscle , owing to
the orderly alignment of the gaps between the collagen molecules
within a microfibril. As bone grows, microfibrils become arranged
into fibers, and the fibers into larger bundles. The true strength of
collagen comes from the strong chemical bonds (cross-linking )
that form between adjacent collagen molecules throughout the
collagen bundles. Collagen bundles are bunched  together
longitudinal ly to form tendo ns or ligaments, or are arranged in
sheets with the layers oriented in different directions, as found in
bone, carti lage, and f ascia.
FIGURE 5.5  Formation of a col lagen fiber .
317
Tendons and ligaments are composed primari ly of tightly packed,
parallel arrangements of collagen bundles. Matur e tendons and
ligaments contain relatively few cells. The small number of
metabol ically active cells in tendons and ligaments makes the
requirement for oxygen and nutrients in these tissues relatively low.
Ligaments contain elastic fibers (elastin ) in addition to collagen,
because a certain amount of stretch is needed within a ligament to
allow normal joint motion. Tendons and ligaments attach to bone
with great strength, allowing the maximal transmission of forces.
The fibrous connectiv e tissues that surround and separ ate the
different organizational levels within skeletal muscle are referred to
as fascia. Fascia has sheets of fibrocollagenous support tissue,
containing bundles of collagen fibers arranged in different planes, to
provide resistance to forces from different directions. Fascia within
muscles converges near the end of the muscle to form a tendon
through which the force of muscle contraction is transmi tted to
bone. Compar ed with that of muscle tissue, tendon metabol ism is
much slower due to poorer vasculari ty and circulation (82). In fact,
the increase in blood flow to skeletal muscle via exercise is not
paralleled by the same perfusion in tendons (88). This limited
vasculari ty has implications for regener ation and is the reason
tendons can tak e signi ficant amounts of time to heal f ollowing injury .
The primary stimulus for growth of tendons, ligaments, and fascia
is the insult from mechanical forces created during high-intensi ty
exercise. The degree of tissue adaptation appears to be proportional
to the intensi ty of exercise (88). Consistent  anaer obic exercise that
exceeds the threshold of strain has a positive effect on stimulating
connectiv e tissue changes (82).
Empirical evidence suggests that connectiv e tissues must increase
their functional capabi lities in response to increased muscle strength
and hypertr ophy. The sites where connectiv e tissues can increase
strength and load-bearing capaci ty are
the junctions between the tendon (and ligament) and bone
surface,
318
within the body of the tendon or l igament, and
in the network of f ascia wi thin sk eletal muscle (99).
As muscles become stronger, they pull on their bony attachments
with greater force and cause an increase in bone mass at the
tendon–bone junction and along the line over which the forces are
distributed.
High-intensi ty anaer obic training results in connectiv e tissue
growth and other ultrastructur al changes that enhance force
transmission. Specific changes within a tendon that contribute to its
increase in siz e and str ength include the f ollowing:
An incr ease in col lagen fibri l diameter
A greater number of covalent cross-links within the
hypertr ophied fiber
An incr ease in the number of col lagen fibri ls
An incr ease in the packing densi ty of col lagen fibri ls
Collectively, these adaptations increase the tendon’ s ability to
withstand gr eater tensional f orces (120).
Muscle hypertrophy in animals relates to an increase in the
number and size of fibroblast s, thereby resulting in a greater supply
of total collagen. Activation of fibroblasts and subsequent  growth of
the connectiv e tissue network are prerequisi tes for hypertr ophy of
active muscle (121). This may explain why biopsies of trained
athletes have shown that hypertr ophied muscle contains greater
total collagen than in untrained individuals but that the collagen
content remains proportional to the existing muscle mass (120). Past
studies indicate that tendon stiffness  (force transmission per unit
of strain, or tendon elongation) increases as a result of resistance
training (101, 123). In fact, Kubo and colleagues (99) reported a
15% to 19% increase in Achilles tendon stiffness following eight
weeks of resistance training. Furthermor e, patella tendon CSA
increased by 5% to 6% after nine weeks of knee extension training
(151). The intensi ty of exercise is critical; heavy loads (80% 1RM)
increase tendon sti ffness, but l ight loads (20% 1RM) do not (100).
319
How Can Athletes Stimulate Connective
Tissue Ad aptations?
Tendons, Ligaments, Fascia
Long-term adaptations in tendons, ligaments, and fascia are stimulated
through progressive high-intensi ty loading patterns using externa l
resistances.
High-intensi ty loads should be used, because low to moder ate intensi ties do
not mark edly change the col lagen content of connectiv e tissue.
Forces should be exerted throughout the full range of motion of a joint, and
wherever possible mul tijoint ex ercises should be used.
Cartilage
Moder ate-intensi ty anaer obic exercise seems to be adequate for increasing
cartilage thickness . Strenuous exercise does not appear to cause any
degener ative joint disease when pr ogressively overloaded appr opriately .
Tissue viability can be maintained by adopting a variety of exercise modal ities
and ensuring that load is appl ied thr oughout the r ange of motion.
Adaptations of Cartilage to Anaerobic
Training
Cartilage is a dense connectiv e tissue capable of withstanding
consider able force without damage to its structur e. The main
functions of carti lage ar e to
provide a smooth joint articulating surf ace,
act as a shock  absorber for forces directed through the joint,
and
aid in the at tachment of connectiv e tissue to the sk eleton.
A feature unique to cartilage is that it lacks its own blood supply
and must depend on diffusion of oxygen and nutrients from synovial
fluid (which is why cartilage does not easily repair itself following
injury). Two primary types of cartilage are significant in relation to
physical activity. Hyaline cartilage  (articular cartilage) is found on
the articulating surfaces of bones. Fibrous cartilage  is a very
320
tough form of cartilage found in the interv ertebr al disks of the spine
and at the junctions wher e tendons at tach to bone.
The fact that articular cartilage gets its nutrient supply via
diffusion from synovial fluid provides a link for joint mobility to joint
health. Movement about a joint creates changes in pressure in the
joint capsule that drive nutrients from the synovial fluid toward the
articular cartilage of the joint (156). Immobi lization of a joint
prevents proper diffusion of oxygen and essential nutrients
throughout the joint. This results in the death of the healthy cells
within cartilage, called chondr ocytes , and a resorption of the
cartilage matrix (167). Current understanding indicates that human
cartilage under goes atrophy, or thinning, when external loading is
removed (e.g., postoper ative immobi lization and paraplegia).
Howev er, the effect that increased external loading has on average
cartilage thickness remains to be fully elucidated (50). In any case, it
is likely that genetics plays a greater role in determining cartilage
morphology .
321
Endocrine Responses and Adaptations
to Anaerobic Training
Hormones have a variety of regulatory roles during anaer obic
training and affect homeostatic mechanisms dedicated to keeping
the body’s functions within normal range during rest and exercise
(60, 61, 102, 106, 109). These include the development of muscle,
bone, and connectiv e tissue through both anabol ic and catabol ic
processes. As discussed in chapter 4, endocrine responses to
anaer obic training can include chronic changes in the acute response
to a workout, chronic changes in resting concentr ations, and
changes in hormone–r eceptor content.
Chronic Changes in the Acute Hormonal
Response
Adher ence to a long-term resistance training program results in an
increased ability to exert greater levels of muscular force (72), with
relative training intensi ties increasing over time as the body adapts
to tolerate progressively heavier loads. As a consequence, acute
endocrine responses to anaer obic training will likely mirror these
improvements, as has been predominantly shown with growth
hormone (33). The longitudinal changes in endocrine function reflect
the increased exercise stress being tolerated by the body in response
to incremental external loading. It is thus hypothesiz ed that any
chronic adapta tions in acute hormonal response patterns potential ly
augment the ability to better tolerate and sustain prolonged higher
exercise intensi ties.
Chronic Changes in R esting Hormonal
Concentrations
Chronic changes in resting hormone concentr ations following
anaer obic exercise are unlikely, with resear ch providing inconclusiv e
changes in testoster one, growth hormone, IGF-1, and cortisol over
322
time (96). Instead, resting concentr ations likely reflect the current
state of the muscle tissue in response to substantial changes to the
training program (i.e., volume or intensi ty) and nutritional factors. It
appears that the elevation during and immediately following a
workout may present recepto rs with enough of a stimulu s to affect
tissue remodel ing without the need for chronic elevations in basal
concentr ations (36). It is important to note that chronic elevations in
an anabolic hormone may be counterpr oductiv e over the long term.
Receptors tend to downr egulate over time when exposed
consistently to high levels of hormones. For example, in type 2
diabetes mellitus, sensitivity of skeletal muscle to insulin is reduced
due to chronic elevated blood insulin. This is why anabol ic steroid
users repeatedly cycle drug use rather than maintaining consistently
high doses.
Hormone Receptor Changes
Receptor content is important for mediating the adaptations elicited
by any hormonal response. Androgen receptors (AR) have received
much attention in the literature, and their content (i.e., number of
receptors per area on the target tissue) depends on several factors
including muscle fiber type, contractile activity, and the
concentr ations of testoster one. Resistance training has been shown
to upregulate AR content within 48 to 72 hours after the workout
(73). The resistance exercise stimulus appears to mediate the
magni tude of acute AR modifications. Ratamess and colleagues
(137) compar ed 1 set versus 6 sets of 10 repetitions of squats and
reported no differences in AR content following the single-set
protocol; however, the higher -volume protocol elicited significant
downr egulation of AR content 1 hour after the workout. This study
also demonstr ated that when sufficient volume is reached, AR
protein content may initially downr egulate before the upregulation
that has been shown in other studies. Howev er, Kraemer and
colleagues (98) have shown that consumption of a protein–
323
carboh ydrate supplement before and after the workout attenuates
this AR downr egulation.
324
Cardiovascular Adaptations to
Anaerobic Training
Anaer obic exercise has important effects on the cardiovascular
system that include both chronic adaptations at rest and acute
adaptations (55-57). These changes include reductions in resting
heart rate and blood pressure (55). Chronic resistance training also
leads to increases in stroke volume and modifications in cardiac
dimensions, such as increased left ventricular wall thickness and
mass, although  these changes are relative to body surface area and
lean body mass (57). Additional ly, resistance-tr ained athletes exhibi t
lower heart rates and blood pressure during acute exercise bouts
compar ed to untrained individuals. Enhanced stroke volume and
cardiac output are also noted, demonstr ating improved efficiency in
managing ex ercise-induced str ess (55-57).
Chronic Cardiovascular Adaptations at
Rest
The effect of anaer obic training modal ities on resting heart rate
remains to be fully elucidated. Short-term resistance training has
been shown to decrease resting heart rate between 5% and 12%
(55). However, when this effect is studied longitudinal ly over time,
mixed responses are reported, with either no change in resting heart
rate or reductio ns of 4% to 13% (53, 57). In chronical ly resistance-
trained athlete s (e.g., bodybui lders, powerl ifters, weightl ifters), both
average and lower -than- average resting heart rates (60-78
beats/min) have been reported compar ed to those in untrained
individuals.
A meta- analysis of resting blood pressure indicated that both
systol ic and diastol ic blood pressure decreased by 2% to 4% as an
adaptation to resistance training (85). It appears that the response
is greater in those individuals who initially have elevated blood
pressure. Similarly, the rate–pressure product  (heart rate ×
325
systol ic blood pressure; a measur e of myocardial work) has been
shown to either remain constant or decrease following resistance
training. Stroke volume has been shown to increase in absolute
magni tude but not relative to body surface area or lean body mass.
That is, stroke volume will increase as lean tissue mass increases
during long-term resistance training. Finally, resistance training may
either not change or slightly decrease total cholester ol and low-
density lipoproteins and increase high-densi ty lipoproteins (80).
Therefore, heavy resistance training does little to enhance resting
cardiac function, but greater improvements may result from
adaptations to a high-volume program with short rest periods (i.e.,
bodybui lding or circuit training) in which the overall continui ty of the
exercise str ess in a work out is much higher .
Chronic resistance training also alters cardiac dimensions.
Increased left ventricular wall thickness and mass have been
reported, but the increase disappears when expressed relative to
body surface area or lean body mass. It is thought that this increase
may result from exposur e to intermi ttently elevated blood pressures
and increases in intrathoracic pressure in addition to accommodating
changes from increases in lean body mass and body size. Highly
resistance-tr ained athletes have greater than normal absolute
posterior left ventricular and intraventricular septum wall thickness
(57). Little or no change in left ventricular chamber size or volume is
observ ed with resistance training; this is a major difference between
resistance exercise and aerobic exercise. Greater than normal
absolute left and right ventricular end-diastol ic and end-systol ic
volumes have been reported in bodybui lders but not weightl ifters
(55), which indicates that high-volume training may be more
conduciv e to increasing absolute left ventricular volumes. It is
important to note that bodybui lders frequently incorpor ate aerobic
exercise into their training programs in an effort to metab olize body
fat and promote a lean body composi tion; therefore, it is possible
that some of these adaptation s have been brought about, in part, by
aerobic endur ance training. Bodybui lders as well as weightl ifters
326
have greater than normal absolute and relative (to lean body mass
and body surface) left atrial internal dimensions, with the
bodybui lders showing a signi ficantly gr eater dimension (46).
Chronic Adaptations of the Acute
Cardiovascular Response to Anaerobic
Exercise
Chronic resista nce training reduces the cardiovascular response to
an acute bout of resistance exercise of a given absolute intensi ty or
workload. Short-term studies have shown that resistance training is
associated with reductions in the acute increases in heart rate, blood
pressure, and double product caused by submaximal resistance
exercise but may promote an increase in the pressor response to
maximal or isometric exercise (119, 142). In addition, male
bodybui lders have been found to have lower systol ic and diastol ic
blood pressure and heart rates during sets of 50% to 100% of 1RM
performed to momentary muscular failure compar ed to both
sedentary and lesser -trained men (56). Finally, oxygen extraction is
gener ally not improved with resistance training using heavy loads
and low volume. It is enhanced to a greater extent with continuous
aerobic exercise or with a resistance training program using high
volume and short rest periods or among populations with low
baseline car diorespiratory fi tness (97 , 119a).
327
Compatibility of Aerobic and Anaerobic
Modes of Training
Strength or power training and work capaci ty–endur ance training
have divergent physiology that presents a programming challenge to
the strength and condi tioning professional working to optimiz e
concurr ent gains in both these physical and physiological
characteristics. Combining resistance and aerobic endur ance training
may interfere with strength and power gains, primari ly if the aerobic
endur ance training is high in intensi ty, volume, or frequency and
compr omises resistance training quality (51, 76, 106). Possible
explanations for this less-than-optimal power development are likely
due to the impact of aerobic training on the quality of resistance
training via fatigue pathways, thus augmenting the resistance
exercise stimu lus (126). In contrast, most studies have shown no
adverse effects on aerobic power resulting from heavy resistance
exercise despite the expected cellular changes caused by this type of
exercise (112). Few studies have shown that resistance training can
hinder V̇O2max improvements (62). Interestingly , Kraemer and
colleagues (94) reported that women who performed both resistance
exercise and aerobic endur ance training had greater aerobic
development than those who performed the aerobic endur ance
training alone. Such data have encour aged some athletes (e.g.,
distance runners) to add supplemental sport-speci fic resistance
training to their total training regimen. Indeed, the majori ty of
resear ch indica tes that heavy resistance training has very limited, if
any, negativ e effects on aerobic power (126) but instead can serve
to enhance perf ormance in aer obic endur ance sports (147 , 169).
In a study examining the potential incompatibi lity of strength and
endur ance exercise, Kraemer and colleagues (94) used three months
of simultaneous high-intensi ty strength and aerobic endur ance
training under fiv e condi tions:
328
1. A combination group (C) that performed both resistance and
aerobic endur ance tr aining
2. A group (UC) that performed upper body resistance and
aerobic endur ance tr aining
3. A resistance tr aining–only gr oup (S)
4. An aer obic endur ance tr aining–only gr oup (E)
5. A contr ol group
The S group increased 1RM strength and rate of strength
development more than did the C group. Additional ly, maximal
oxygen consu mption improvements were not affected by the
simultaneous training (i.e., almost identical improvement s in 2-mile
[3.2 km] run times). Thus, no overtraining state for aerobic
endur ance w as appar ent.
A fascinating finding of the resear ch by Kraemer and colleagues
(94) was change in the muscle fiber size of the thigh musculatur e.
Previous studies have shown decreases in muscle fiber size during
aerobic endur ance training (19, 62). Kraemer ’s group (94), howev er,
indicated that the transformation of type IIx to type IIa fibers was
almost comple te in the S group (19.1%±7 .9% type IIx before
training to 1.9%±0.8% after training) and C group (14.11%±7 .2%
before to 1.6%±0.8% after). Interestingly , the UC and E groups
(who performed only interv al training) also had significant type IIx
fiber transformation after training (22.6%±4 .9% before to 11.6%
±5.3% after for UC, and 19.2%±3.6% before to 8.8%±4 .4% after
for E). This indicates that heavy resistance training recruits more
type IIx fibers than high-intensi ty aerobic endur ance interv al
training. Additional ly, a small number (<3%) of type IIa fibers were
converted to type IIc fibers in the E group. The C group increased
muscle size only in type IIa fibers, while the S group demonstrated
increases in type I, IIc, and IIa fibers. The lack of change in type I
fiber area and increase in type IIa fiber area in the C group appear
to represent a cellular adaptation that shows the antagonism of
simultaneous strength and aerobic endur ance stimul i, since strength
329
training alone produced increases in both type I and II muscle fiber
areas. The E group showed decreased size in type I and IIc fibers,
presumably due to higher observ ed cortisol levels (and reduced
testoster one) and their physiological need for shorter distances
between capillaries and cells to enhance oxygen kinetics. On the
other hand, other studies suggest that aerobic exercise can be done
before resistance training without compr omising performance
(105a).
The majority of studies use untrained subjects to examine the
effects of simultaneous high-intensi ty resistance training and aerobic
endur ance training (62, 104, 118). Few studies have looked at
concurr ent training in elite athlete populations (147). Several studies
have shown an incompatibi lity using three days a week of resistance
training alternating with three days a week of aerobic endur ance
training (i.e., training on six consecutiv e days), or four to six days a
week of combined high-intensi ty resistance and aerobic endur ance
training (20, 48, 94), thereby lending credibility to the suggestion
that the onset of overtraining  mechanisms could have played a role.
When both modal ities are performed during the same workout
(yielding a frequency of three days a week with at least one day off
between workouts), the incompatibi lity has not been shown as
frequently (104, 117, 118). An exception was a study by Sale and
colleagues (141), which showed that training four days (two days of
resistance training and two days of aerobic endur ance training) per
week was better than training two days (combined resistance
training and aerobic endur ance training) per week for increasing leg
press 1RM (25% vs. 13%). These studies show that increasing the
recovery period  between workouts may decrease the incompatibi lity,
a principle supported b y the l iterature (173, 126).
What Performance Improvements Occur
Following Anaerobic Exercise?
330
Muscular Strength
A review of more than 100 studies has shown that mean strength can
increase approximately 40% in untrained, 20% in moder ately trained, 16% in
trained, 10% in advanced, and 2% in elite participants over periods ranging
from four weeks to two y ears (10).
With training, a positive shift in muscle fiber types reflects an augmented
recruitment of higher -order motor units. Type IIx fibers transition to type IIa
fibers and reflect a greater fatigue resistance at similar absolute force output
as well as an increase in muscle myofibrillar content through hypertr ophy
(146).
Power
The optim al load for maximizing absolute peak power output in the jump
squat is 0% of the 1RM (i.e., body weight [31]). Howev er, it has been
reported that peak power output is maximiz ed in trained power athletes with
higher loads corr esponding to 30% to 60% of a squat 1RM (16).
Peak power in the squat is maximiz ed at 56% of the 1RM and in the power
clean at 80% of the 1RM (31).
For the upper body, peak power output can be maximiz ed during the ballistic
bench press throw using loads corresponding to 46% to 62% of a bench
press 1RM (15, 128).
Local Muscular Endurance
Cross-sectional data in anaer obic athletes have shown enhanced muscular
endur ance and subsequent muscular adaptations consistent with improved
oxidativ e and buf fering capaci ty (60).
Skeletal muscle adaptations to anaer obic muscular endur ance training include
fiber-type transitions from type IIx to type IIb, as well as increases in
mitochondrial and capillary numbers, buffering capaci ty, resistance to fatigue,
and metabol ic enzyme activi ty (60).
Body Composition
Resistance training can increase fat-free mass and reduce body fat by up to
9% (116).
Increases in lean tissue mass, daily metabol ic rate, and energy expendi ture
during ex ercise ar e outcomes of r esistance tr aining (53).
Flexibility and Mobility
Anaer obic training potential ly can have a positive impact on flexibi lity, and a
combination of resistance training and stretching appears to be the most
effective method to improve flexibi lity with increasing muscle mass (8). When
exercises are performed properly through a full range of motion, mobility may
331
be enhanced or maintained through resistance training with loads greater
than only body mass.
Aerobic Capacity
In untrained people, heavy resistance training can increase V̇O2max from 5%
to 8%. In trained individuals, resistanc e training does not significantly affect
aerobic capaci ty (52).
Circuit training, high-intensi ty interv al training, and programs using high
volume, high intensi ties, and short rest periods (i.e., 30 s or less) have been
shown to impr ove V̇O2max (25).
Motor Performance
Resistance training has been shown to increase running econom y, vertica l
and broad jumps, sprint speed, cycling power , tennis serve velocity, swinging
and thr owing v elocity, and kicking perf ormance (116).
Power development appears to be negativ ely affected more than
strength during concurr ent high-intensi ty resistance and aerobic
endur ance training. Häkkinen  and colleagues (70) reported similar
dynamic and isometric strength increases following 21 weeks of
concurr ent training or resistance training only; howev er, the
resistance training–only group showed improvements in the rate of
force development whereas the concurr ent training group did not
match this increase. Kraemer  and colleagues (94) also showed that a
resistance training–only group increased muscle power whereas a
combined group did not. The resistance training–only group also
increased peak power in upper and lower body tests while the
combined group did not. It appears that power development is much
more susceptible to the antagonistic effects of combined strength
and aerobic endur ance training than slow-velocity strength (94).
Finally, the sequence may play a role in the magni tude of adaptation
(51).
332
Detraining
Detraining  is the term given to a decrement in performance and
loss of the accumulated physiological adaptations following the
cessation of anaer obic training or when there is a substantial
reduction in frequency , volume, intensi ty, or any combination of
these variables. According to the principles of reversibi lity, training-
induced adaptations are transient and thus can disappear  when the
training load is insufficient or removed completely . The result is a
partial or complete loss of the anatomical, physiological, and
performance adaptations that have been made (123). The
magni tude of these losses is dependent on the length of the
detraining period as well as the initial training status of the
individual.
Following the removal of a training stimulus is a lag time before
the effects of detraining are fully observ ed. Strength performance in
gener al is readily maintained for up to four weeks of inactivity, but in
highly trained athletes, eccentric force and sport-speci fic power may
decline significantly faster (124). In trained weightl ifters, removing
the training stimulus for 14 days did not significantly affect 1RM
strength performance in the bench press (−1.7%) and squat
(−0.9%), isometric (−7%) and isokinetic concentric knee extension
force (−2.3%), or vertical jump performance (1.2%) (108). In
recreational ly trained men, very little change is seen during the first
six weeks of detraining (92). Longer periods of training cessation are
accompanied by significantly  pronounced declines in the strength
performance of strength-tr ained athletes (124), but this loss is still
limited to 7% to 12% during periods of inactivi ty ranging  from 8 to
12 weeks.
This strength loss is coupled with decreased average maximal
bilateral and unilateral intramuscular EMG. Indeed, strength
reductions appear related to neural mechanisms initially, with
atrophy predominating as the detraining period extends.
Interestingly , the amount of muscle strength retained is rarely lower
333
than pretraining values, indicating that resistance training has a
residual effect when the stimulus is removed. Howev er, when the
athlete returns to training, the rate of strength reattainment is high,
supporting the par adigm of muscle memory (153).
With respect to muscle fiber characteristics following the cessation
of training, it appears that fiber disruption remains unchanged
during the initial weeks of inactivi ty, but oxidativ e fibers may
increase in strength-tr ained athletes (decrease in endur ance
athletes) within eight weeks of stopping training (124). In strength-
trained athletes, 14 days of inactivi ty has been reported to have no
effect on muscle fiber type distribution (78). In comparison, muscle
fiber CSA declines rapidly in strength and sprint athletes (124). In 12
trained weightl ifters, Hortobagyi and colleagues (78) observ ed a
decline of 6.4% in fast-twitch fiber CSA in 14 days. These changes
specifically targeted fast-twitch fibers initially, with no significant
change immediately found in the slow-twitch fiber population.
Longer periods  of stoppage bring about declines in both fast- and
slow-twitch fiber CSA and muscle mass in anaer obical ly trained
athletes.
334
Conclusion
Anaer obic exercise represents a specific type of training stress to the
anatom y and various systems of the body, and adaptations
consequent to anaer obic training are specific to the nature of the
exercise performed. It is also appar ent that an individual’ s age,
nutrition, prior fitness level, and training motiv ation can affect
adaptations. Integration of a training program that has many
components requires careful planning and monitoring to minimiz e
the occurrence of incompatibi lities or overtraining. Explosi ve training
evokes marked increases in muscular power , whereas more
conventional heavy resistance training mainly increases muscle size
and strength. Anaer obic training (resistance, sprint, plyometric,
agility, high-in tensity interv al training) in gener al elicits specific
adaptations in the nervous system leading to greater recruitment,
firing rate (rate coding), and enhanced muscle function that
increases str ength and power .
Anaer obic training also has positive effects on bone, muscle, and
the associated connectiv e tissue; the entire musculosk eletal system
under goes a coordinated adaptation to exercise. Athletes
undertaking strenuous exercise training experience changes in the
force-gener ating capabi lities of muscle, resulting in a coordinated
and proportional increase in the load-bearing capaci ty of bone and
other connectiv e tissue. Anaerobic training can increase skeletal
muscle mass, force-gener ating capabi lity, and metabol ic capacity and
may lead to subtle alterations of the endocrine system that enhance
the tissue r emodel ing pr ocess.
Anaer obic training gener ally results in fewer acute and chronic
responses in the cardiovascular and respiratory systems , although
low-intensi ty, high-volume resistance exercise produces some
responses that are similar to those with aerobic exercise.
Collectively, improved neuromuscular , musculosk eletal, endocrine,
and cardiovascular function contribute to enhanced muscl e strength,
power , hypertr ophy, muscular endur ance, and motor performance—
335
all of which contribute to increased athletic performance. The
adaptations observ ed in athletes are directly related to the quality of
the exercise stimulus and accordingly to the levels of progressive
overload, specificity, and variation incorpor ated into program design.
The scientific basis of program design is ultimately seen in the
effectiveness wi th which the athlete impr oves perf ormance.
KEY TERMS
actin
anaer obic tr aining
bilateral defici t
bilateral facilitation
bone matrix
bone miner al densi ty (BMD)
collagen
cortical bone
cross-education
cross-linking
cross-sectional ar ea (CS A)
detraining
dual-ener gy X-ray absorptiometry (D XA)
elastin
electr omyography (EMG)
exercise-induced muscle damage (EIMD)
fibrous carti lage
hyaline carti lage
hydroxyapatite
hyperplasia
hypertr ophy
mechanical loading
microfibril
minimal essential str ain (MES)
motor uni t
myogenesis
336
myosin
myotatic r eflex
nebul in
neuromuscular junction (NMJ)
osteoblasts
osteogenic stimul i
osteopor osis
peak bone mass
pennation angle
periosteum
procollagen
progressive overload
quanti tative computed tomogr aphy (QCT )
rate–pr essure product
size principle
specificity of loading
stress fractures
structur al exercises
tendon sti ffness
titin
trabecular bone
STUDY QUESTIONS
  1.  Which neuromuscular phenomenon occurs when there is an
increase or maintenance of muscular strength of an untrained
limb when tr aining the contr alater al limb?
  a.  cr oss-education
  b.  bilateral defici t
  c.  ex ercise-induced muscle damage
  d.  maximal v oluntary isometric contr action
  2.  Adaptations to anaer obic training, particularly neuromuscular
system improvements that occur during the early phases of
training, can oc cur in
337
  a.  1 to 4 weeks
  b.  6 to 8 weeks
  c.  10 to 14 weeks
  d.  20 to 24 weeks
  3.  Which of the following  is not one of the motor unit
adaptations to anaer obic tr aining?
  a.  h ypertr ophy of al l types of muscle fibers
  b.  greater synaptic input needed f or re-recruitment
  c.  shi ft of neur on firing f requency to higher r ates
  d.  recruitment of a maximum per centage of a vailable motor
units
  4.  Bone development during anaer obic training requires a
minimal essen tial strain (MES) to trigger the appropriate
adaptations. What is the MES r equired?
  a.  1/2 the f racture force
  b.  1/5 the f racture force
  c.  1/10 the f racture force
  d.  1/15 the f racture force
  5.  Anaer obic tr aining r esults in what muscle fibri llar adaptations?
  a.  Fibers, as a whole, shi ft to become mor e anaer obic.
  b.  Fibers, as a whole, exhibi t no change.
  c.  Fibers, as a whole, shi ft to become mor e aerobic.
  d.  Anaer obic fibers become mor e anaer obic, whi le no change
is observ ed in aer obic fibers.
338