# Section 5.4

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 5: Adaptations to Anaerobic Training

**Section:** 5.4 -- Endocrine Responses to Anaerobic Training

**PDF Pages:** 321--330

tough form of cartilage found in the interv ertebr al disks of the spine
and at the junctions wher e tendons at tach to bone.
The fact that articular cartilage gets its nutrient supply via
diffusion from synovial fluid provides a link for joint mobility to joint
health. Movement about a joint creates changes in pressure in the
joint capsule that drive nutrients from the synovial fluid toward the
articular cartilage of the joint (156). Immobi lization of a joint
prevents proper diffusion of oxygen and essential nutrients
throughout the joint. This results in the death of the healthy cells
within cartilage, called chondr ocytes , and a resorption of the
cartilage matrix (167). Current understanding indicates that human
cartilage under goes atrophy, or thinning, when external loading is
removed (e.g., postoper ative immobi lization and paraplegia).
Howev er, the effect that increased external loading has on average
cartilage thickness remains to be fully elucidated (50). In any case, it
is likely that genetics plays a greater role in determining cartilage
morphology .
321
Endocrine Responses and Adaptations
to Anaerobic Training
Hormones have a variety of regulatory roles during anaer obic
training and affect homeostatic mechanisms dedicated to keeping
the body’s functions within normal range during rest and exercise
(60, 61, 102, 106, 109). These include the development of muscle,
bone, and connectiv e tissue through both anabol ic and catabol ic
processes. As discussed in chapter 4, endocrine responses to
anaer obic training can include chronic changes in the acute response
to a workout, chronic changes in resting concentr ations, and
changes in hormone–r eceptor content.
Chronic Changes in the Acute Hormonal
Response
Adher ence to a long-term resistance training program results in an
increased ability to exert greater levels of muscular force (72), with
relative training intensi ties increasing over time as the body adapts
to tolerate progressively heavier loads. As a consequence, acute
endocrine responses to anaer obic training will likely mirror these
improvements, as has been predominantly shown with growth
hormone (33). The longitudinal changes in endocrine function reflect
the increased exercise stress being tolerated by the body in response
to incremental external loading. It is thus hypothesiz ed that any
chronic adapta tions in acute hormonal response patterns potential ly
augment the ability to better tolerate and sustain prolonged higher
exercise intensi ties.
Chronic Changes in R esting Hormonal
Concentrations
Chronic changes in resting hormone concentr ations following
anaer obic exercise are unlikely, with resear ch providing inconclusiv e
changes in testoster one, growth hormone, IGF-1, and cortisol over
322
time (96). Instead, resting concentr ations likely reflect the current
state of the muscle tissue in response to substantial changes to the
training program (i.e., volume or intensi ty) and nutritional factors. It
appears that the elevation during and immediately following a
workout may present recepto rs with enough of a stimulu s to affect
tissue remodel ing without the need for chronic elevations in basal
concentr ations (36). It is important to note that chronic elevations in
an anabolic hormone may be counterpr oductiv e over the long term.
Receptors tend to downr egulate over time when exposed
consistently to high levels of hormones. For example, in type 2
diabetes mellitus, sensitivity of skeletal muscle to insulin is reduced
due to chronic elevated blood insulin. This is why anabol ic steroid
users repeatedly cycle drug use rather than maintaining consistently
high doses.
Hormone Receptor Changes
Receptor content is important for mediating the adaptations elicited
by any hormonal response. Androgen receptors (AR) have received
much attention in the literature, and their content (i.e., number of
receptors per area on the target tissue) depends on several factors
including muscle fiber type, contractile activity, and the
concentr ations of testoster one. Resistance training has been shown
to upregulate AR content within 48 to 72 hours after the workout
(73). The resistance exercise stimulus appears to mediate the
magni tude of acute AR modifications. Ratamess and colleagues
(137) compar ed 1 set versus 6 sets of 10 repetitions of squats and
reported no differences in AR content following the single-set
protocol; however, the higher -volume protocol elicited significant
downr egulation of AR content 1 hour after the workout. This study
also demonstr ated that when sufficient volume is reached, AR
protein content may initially downr egulate before the upregulation
that has been shown in other studies. Howev er, Kraemer and
colleagues (98) have shown that consumption of a protein–
323
carboh ydrate supplement before and after the workout attenuates
this AR downr egulation.
324
Cardiovascular Adaptations to
Anaerobic Training
Anaer obic exercise has important effects on the cardiovascular
system that include both chronic adaptations at rest and acute
adaptations (55-57). These changes include reductions in resting
heart rate and blood pressure (55). Chronic resistance training also
leads to increases in stroke volume and modifications in cardiac
dimensions, such as increased left ventricular wall thickness and
mass, although  these changes are relative to body surface area and
lean body mass (57). Additional ly, resistance-tr ained athletes exhibi t
lower heart rates and blood pressure during acute exercise bouts
compar ed to untrained individuals. Enhanced stroke volume and
cardiac output are also noted, demonstr ating improved efficiency in
managing ex ercise-induced str ess (55-57).
Chronic Cardiovascular Adaptations at
Rest
The effect of anaer obic training modal ities on resting heart rate
remains to be fully elucidated. Short-term resistance training has
been shown to decrease resting heart rate between 5% and 12%
(55). However, when this effect is studied longitudinal ly over time,
mixed responses are reported, with either no change in resting heart
rate or reductio ns of 4% to 13% (53, 57). In chronical ly resistance-
trained athlete s (e.g., bodybui lders, powerl ifters, weightl ifters), both
average and lower -than- average resting heart rates (60-78
beats/min) have been reported compar ed to those in untrained
individuals.
A meta- analysis of resting blood pressure indicated that both
systol ic and diastol ic blood pressure decreased by 2% to 4% as an
adaptation to resistance training (85). It appears that the response
is greater in those individuals who initially have elevated blood
pressure. Similarly, the rate–pressure product  (heart rate ×
325
systol ic blood pressure; a measur e of myocardial work) has been
shown to either remain constant or decrease following resistance
training. Stroke volume has been shown to increase in absolute
magni tude but not relative to body surface area or lean body mass.
That is, stroke volume will increase as lean tissue mass increases
during long-term resistance training. Finally, resistance training may
either not change or slightly decrease total cholester ol and low-
density lipoproteins and increase high-densi ty lipoproteins (80).
Therefore, heavy resistance training does little to enhance resting
cardiac function, but greater improvements may result from
adaptations to a high-volume program with short rest periods (i.e.,
bodybui lding or circuit training) in which the overall continui ty of the
exercise str ess in a work out is much higher .
Chronic resistance training also alters cardiac dimensions.
Increased left ventricular wall thickness and mass have been
reported, but the increase disappears when expressed relative to
body surface area or lean body mass. It is thought that this increase
may result from exposur e to intermi ttently elevated blood pressures
and increases in intrathoracic pressure in addition to accommodating
changes from increases in lean body mass and body size. Highly
resistance-tr ained athletes have greater than normal absolute
posterior left ventricular and intraventricular septum wall thickness
(57). Little or no change in left ventricular chamber size or volume is
observ ed with resistance training; this is a major difference between
resistance exercise and aerobic exercise. Greater than normal
absolute left and right ventricular end-diastol ic and end-systol ic
volumes have been reported in bodybui lders but not weightl ifters
(55), which indicates that high-volume training may be more
conduciv e to increasing absolute left ventricular volumes. It is
important to note that bodybui lders frequently incorpor ate aerobic
exercise into their training programs in an effort to metab olize body
fat and promote a lean body composi tion; therefore, it is possible
that some of these adaptation s have been brought about, in part, by
aerobic endur ance training. Bodybui lders as well as weightl ifters
326
have greater than normal absolute and relative (to lean body mass
and body surface) left atrial internal dimensions, with the
bodybui lders showing a signi ficantly gr eater dimension (46).
Chronic Adaptations of the Acute
Cardiovascular Response to Anaerobic
Exercise
Chronic resista nce training reduces the cardiovascular response to
an acute bout of resistance exercise of a given absolute intensi ty or
workload. Short-term studies have shown that resistance training is
associated with reductions in the acute increases in heart rate, blood
pressure, and double product caused by submaximal resistance
exercise but may promote an increase in the pressor response to
maximal or isometric exercise (119, 142). In addition, male
bodybui lders have been found to have lower systol ic and diastol ic
blood pressure and heart rates during sets of 50% to 100% of 1RM
performed to momentary muscular failure compar ed to both
sedentary and lesser -trained men (56). Finally, oxygen extraction is
gener ally not improved with resistance training using heavy loads
and low volume. It is enhanced to a greater extent with continuous
aerobic exercise or with a resistance training program using high
volume and short rest periods or among populations with low
baseline car diorespiratory fi tness (97 , 119a).
327
Compatibility of Aerobic and Anaerobic
Modes of Training
Strength or power training and work capaci ty–endur ance training
have divergent physiology that presents a programming challenge to
the strength and condi tioning professional working to optimiz e
concurr ent gains in both these physical and physiological
characteristics. Combining resistance and aerobic endur ance training
may interfere with strength and power gains, primari ly if the aerobic
endur ance training is high in intensi ty, volume, or frequency and
compr omises resistance training quality (51, 76, 106). Possible
explanations for this less-than-optimal power development are likely
due to the impact of aerobic training on the quality of resistance
training via fatigue pathways, thus augmenting the resistance
exercise stimu lus (126). In contrast, most studies have shown no
adverse effects on aerobic power resulting from heavy resistance
exercise despite the expected cellular changes caused by this type of
exercise (112). Few studies have shown that resistance training can
hinder V̇O2max improvements (62). Interestingly , Kraemer and
colleagues (94) reported that women who performed both resistance
exercise and aerobic endur ance training had greater aerobic
development than those who performed the aerobic endur ance
training alone. Such data have encour aged some athletes (e.g.,
distance runners) to add supplemental sport-speci fic resistance
training to their total training regimen. Indeed, the majori ty of
resear ch indica tes that heavy resistance training has very limited, if
any, negativ e effects on aerobic power (126) but instead can serve
to enhance perf ormance in aer obic endur ance sports (147 , 169).
In a study examining the potential incompatibi lity of strength and
endur ance exercise, Kraemer and colleagues (94) used three months
of simultaneous high-intensi ty strength and aerobic endur ance
training under fiv e condi tions:
328
1. A combination group (C) that performed both resistance and
aerobic endur ance tr aining
2. A group (UC) that performed upper body resistance and
aerobic endur ance tr aining
3. A resistance tr aining–only gr oup (S)
4. An aer obic endur ance tr aining–only gr oup (E)
5. A contr ol group
The S group increased 1RM strength and rate of strength
development more than did the C group. Additional ly, maximal
oxygen consu mption improvements were not affected by the
simultaneous training (i.e., almost identical improvement s in 2-mile
[3.2 km] run times). Thus, no overtraining state for aerobic
endur ance w as appar ent.
A fascinating finding of the resear ch by Kraemer and colleagues
(94) was change in the muscle fiber size of the thigh musculatur e.
Previous studies have shown decreases in muscle fiber size during
aerobic endur ance training (19, 62). Kraemer ’s group (94), howev er,
indicated that the transformation of type IIx to type IIa fibers was
almost comple te in the S group (19.1%±7 .9% type IIx before
training to 1.9%±0.8% after training) and C group (14.11%±7 .2%
before to 1.6%±0.8% after). Interestingly , the UC and E groups
(who performed only interv al training) also had significant type IIx
fiber transformation after training (22.6%±4 .9% before to 11.6%
±5.3% after for UC, and 19.2%±3.6% before to 8.8%±4 .4% after
for E). This indicates that heavy resistance training recruits more
type IIx fibers than high-intensi ty aerobic endur ance interv al
training. Additional ly, a small number (<3%) of type IIa fibers were
converted to type IIc fibers in the E group. The C group increased
muscle size only in type IIa fibers, while the S group demonstrated
increases in type I, IIc, and IIa fibers. The lack of change in type I
fiber area and increase in type IIa fiber area in the C group appear
to represent a cellular adaptation that shows the antagonism of
simultaneous strength and aerobic endur ance stimul i, since strength
329
training alone produced increases in both type I and II muscle fiber
areas. The E group showed decreased size in type I and IIc fibers,
presumably due to higher observ ed cortisol levels (and reduced
testoster one) and their physiological need for shorter distances
between capillaries and cells to enhance oxygen kinetics. On the
other hand, other studies suggest that aerobic exercise can be done
before resistance training without compr omising performance
(105a).
The majority of studies use untrained subjects to examine the
effects of simultaneous high-intensi ty resistance training and aerobic
endur ance training (62, 104, 118). Few studies have looked at
concurr ent training in elite athlete populations (147). Several studies
have shown an incompatibi lity using three days a week of resistance
training alternating with three days a week of aerobic endur ance
training (i.e., training on six consecutiv e days), or four to six days a
week of combined high-intensi ty resistance and aerobic endur ance
training (20, 48, 94), thereby lending credibility to the suggestion
that the onset of overtraining  mechanisms could have played a role.
When both modal ities are performed during the same workout
(yielding a frequency of three days a week with at least one day off
between workouts), the incompatibi lity has not been shown as
frequently (104, 117, 118). An exception was a study by Sale and
colleagues (141), which showed that training four days (two days of
resistance training and two days of aerobic endur ance training) per
week was better than training two days (combined resistance
training and aerobic endur ance training) per week for increasing leg
press 1RM (25% vs. 13%). These studies show that increasing the
recovery period  between workouts may decrease the incompatibi lity,
a principle supported b y the l iterature (173, 126).
What Performance Improvements Occur
Following Anaerobic Exercise?
330