# Chapter 6: Adaptations to Aerobic Training

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

**PDF Pages:** 339--383

CHAPTER  6
ADAPTATIONS TO AEROBIC
TRAINING
Kate Baldwin, PhD, and Glen B. Deakin, PhD
The authors would like to acknowledge the significant contributions of Ann Swank and
Carwyn P .M. Sharp to this chapter .
After completing this chapter, you will be able to
identi fy and describe the impact of chr onic aer obic endur ance
training on the ph ysiological char acteristics of the
cardiovascular , respiratory, nerv ous, muscular , bone and
connectiv e tissue, and endocrine systems;
recogniz e the inter action between aer obic endur ance tr aining
and optimizing ph ysiological r esponses of al l body systems;
identi fy and describe external f actors that influence adaptations
to chr onic aer obic ex ercise including al titude, heat, smoking
and v aping, blood doping, and detr aining; and
recogniz e the ph ysiological di fferences between al titude
training and heat ac climation.
Understanding how body systems adapt to long-ter m aerobic
exercise is essential for strength and condi tioning professionals to
design effective training programs. This chapter explor es the
physiological changes that occur in response to sustained aerobic
339
endur ance training. It also examines how external factors —including
altitude, heat, detraining, and blood doping— affect the body’s
responses and adaptations to this type of exercise. By covering both
the fundamental adaptations and the impact of these external
influences, the chapter provides a compr ehensiv e overview of
aerobic endur ance tr aining ef fects.
340
Chronic Adaptations to Aerobic Exercise
Understanding the effects of aerobic endur ance training on the body
systems is important for assessing physical or athletic performance
and determining the impact of training programs. This section deals
with the effects of aerobic endur ance training on the cardiovascular ,
respiratory, nervous, muscular , bone and connectiv e tissue, and
endocrine systems of the body ( table 6.1 ).
Cardiovascular Adaptations
Aerobic endur ance training results in several changes in
cardiovascular function, including increased maximal cardiac output,
increased stroke volume, and reduced heart rate at rest and during
submaximal exercise. In addition, muscle fiber capillary density
increases as a result of aerobic endur ance training, supporting
delivery of o xygen and r emoval of carbon dio xide.
TABLE 6.1  Physiological Adaptations to Aerobic
Endurance Training
Variable Aerobic endurance training adaptations
PERFORMANCE
Muscular str ength No change
Muscular endur ance Increases f or low power output
Aerobic power Increases
Exercise econom y Increases
Maximal r ate of f orce production No change or decr eases
Anaer obic power No change
Sprint speed No change
CARDIOVASCULAR FUNCTION
Heart r ate
Note:  ATP = adenosine triphosphate; A TPase = adenosine triphosphatase.
341
Variable Aerobic endurance training adaptations
Resting and submaximal ex ercise Decreases
Maximal ex ercise No change or decr eases
Stroke volume Increases
Cardiac output
Resting or submaximal ex ercise No change or decr eases
Maximal ex ercise Increases
MUSCLE FIBERS
Fiber siz e No change or incr eases sl ightly
Capillary densi ty Increases
Mitochondrial densi ty Increases
Cytoplasmic densi ty No change
Myosin hea vy chain pr otein No change or decr eases in amount
Myofibrillar
Packing densi ty No change
Volume No change
ENZYME ACTIVITY
Creatine phosphokinase Increases
Myokinase Increases
Phosphof ructokinase Variable
Lactate deh ydrogenase Variable
Sodium–potassium A TPase May slightly incr ease
METABOLIC ENERGY STORES
Stored ATP Increases
Stored creatine phosphate Increases
Stored gly cogen Increases
Note:  ATP = adenosine triphosphate; A TPase = adenosine triphosphatase.
342
Variable Aerobic endurance training adaptations
Stored trigly cerides Increase
Fat oxidation Increases
CONNECTIVE TISSUE
Ligament str ength Increases
Tendon str ength Increases
Collagen content Variable
Bone densi ty No change or incr eases
BODY COMPOSITION
% body f at Decreases
Fat-free mass No change
Note:  ATP = adenosine triphosphate; A TPase = adenosine triphosphatase.
The most significant change in cardiovascular function with long-
term (6-12 months) aerobic endur ance training is the increase in
maximal cardiac output, resulting primari ly from improved stroke
volume; maximal heart rate gener ally remains unaltered or may
even decrease slightly. Because maximal heart rate may remain
unaltered or actual ly decrease slightly with prolonged training (95),
perhaps as a result of increased parasympathetic tone (13), the size
of the left ventricle (both chamber volume and wall thickness) and
the strength of contractions (increased contractility) are the key to
increasing stroke volume with maximal as well as submaximal
exercise. Consequently , a significantly lower heart rate in response
to a standar dized submaximal level of work is another hallmark of
aerobic endur ance training. Furthermor e, heart rate increases more
slowly in trained athletes than in sedentary people for a given
workload (38, 108).
Another notable change that comes with aerobic endur ance
training is the peripher al cardiovascular adaptations at the level of
the arterioles and capillaries within the muscles (108). Increased
343
muscle fiber capillary density has been observ ed in response to
aerobic endur ance training and is a function of the volume and
intensi ty of training. In addition to delivering oxygen, nutrients, and
hormones, the capillary circulation provides the means for removing
heat and metabol ic by-products. Subsequently , increasing capillary
density decreases the diffusion distance for oxygen and metabol ic
substr ates, enabling an improved exchange during subsequent
aerobic endur ance tr aining and perf ormances (88).
The implication of the abovementioned changes is that they
increase an aerobic endur ance athlete’ s ability to improve his or her
maximal oxygen uptak e, which is of paramount importance for
optimal aerobic endur ance performance. The reason for this is that a
close relationship exists between maximal cardiac output and
maximal oxygen uptak e, the latter being the product of maximum
cardiac output  and arterio venous oxygen difference (108). More
simply , an increase in maxima l oxygen uptak e means more oxygen is
delivered to and extracted by the working muscles, thereby
providing an increase in exercise intensi ty and ultimately
performance.
While not related to aerobic endur ance performance outcomes, it
is also worth noting that a common cardiovascular adaptation
following aerobic endur ance training is a lower resting heart rate.
The normal dischar ge rate of the sinoatrial (SA) node ranges from
60 to 80 times  per minute. Aerobic endur ance training results in a
significantly slower dischar ge rate due to an increase in
parasympathetic tone. Increased stroke volume also affects the
resting heart rate, because more blood is pumped per contraction,
so the heart needs to contract less frequently to meet the same
cardiac output. Aerobic endur ance training can increase the heart’s
ability to pump blood per contraction at rest and thus may account
for some of the significant bradycardia  (slower heart rate)
observ ed in highly condi tioned aerobic endur ance athletes, whose
resting heart rates commonly range from 40 to 60 beats/min (58,
108). In addition to having low resting heart rates, aerobic
344
endur ance–tr ained athletes have also been found to have an
accelerated heart rate recovery after exercise (13). This is important
to know f or athlete tr aining and moni toring purposes.
Respiratory Adaptations
Pulmonary ventilation gener ally does not limit aerobic exercise and is
either unaffected or only moder ately affected by training (8, 32).
While the respiratory system can accommodate the demands of
high-intensi ty aerobic endur ance exercise for the majori ty of
athletes, evidence suggests that in some highly trained aerobic
endur ance athletes, such total body aerobic endur ance exercise may
exceed the respiratory system’ s functional capaci ty and affect the
ability to transport oxygen to locomotor muscula ture (2).
Furthermor e, the ventilatory adaptations observ ed appear to be
highly specific to activities that involve the type of exercise used in
training; that is, adaptations observ ed during lower extremity
exercise primari ly occur as a result of lower extremity training (108).
If exercise training focuses on the lower extremities, thereby
reducing lactate levels and carbon dioxide production from lactate
buffering as training adapta tions take place, one will not likely
observ e ventilatory adaptation during upper extremity activities,
where no training adaptations have taken place (108). Training
adaptations include increased tidal volume and breathing frequency
with maximal exercise. With submaximal activity, breathing
frequency is often reduced and tidal volume is increased. Ventilatory
adaptations result from local, neural, or chemical adaptations in the
specific muscles tr ained thr ough ex ercise (8, 32).
Neural Adaptations
While neural adaptations resulting from strength and power training
and different speeds of locomotion have been thoroughly
investigated (134), as well as those from fatiguing static and
dynamic contraction perspectiv es (152), those arising from chronic
aerobic training  remain relatively understudied. Nonetheless, chronic
345
aerobic training in discipl ines such as cycling and running can lead to
beneficial adaptations in movement econom y through improvements
in motor recruitment. Chronic aerobic training can result in increased
muscle coactiv ation, enhanced leg stiffness, and a greater ratio of
eccentric -to-concentric muscle activity, enabl ing athlet es to use
stored elastic energy more efficiently , reducing the metab olic cost of
exercise (73a). Supporting resear ch has shown that trained cyclists
and runners exhibi t less variability in muscle activity between pedal
strokes and strides, respectiv ely, as well as shorter durations of
muscle activity compar ed to their novice counterpa rts (21a).
Furthermor e, multisport athletes, such as triathletes, demonstr ate
more extensiv e and variable muscle coactiv ation, along with less
modulation and refined patterns of muscle activity during cycling and
running when compar ed to single-sport athletes (21a, 21b) reflecting
interference with neuromuscular adaptations from multisport
training.
Muscular Adaptations
One of the fundamental adaptiv e responses to aerobic endur ance
training is an increase in the aerobic capaci ty of the trained
musculatur e. This adaptation allows the athlete to perform a given
absolute intensi ty of exercise with greater ease. More impressively,
after training, an athlete can exercise at a greater relative intensi ty
of a now-higher maximal aerobic power . Thus, measuring an
athlete’ s maximal oxygen uptak e only before and after aerobic
endur ance training may not accurately portray his or her ability to
perform during competi tion. For example, an athlete who can run
the marathon at a pace equal to 75% of maximal oxygen uptak e
may, after training, be able to maintain a pace that is 80% of
maximal aerobic power . This adaptation occurs as a result of an
improvement in what is called the athlete’ s critical power  or, more
simply , the athlete’ s maximal oxidativ e energy capaci ty, which also
means that the exercising muscle’ s rate of lactate production
matches the rate of clearance by muscles and other tissues (127a).
346
Consequently , the onset of blood lactate accumulation  (OBLA)
(see chapter 3) occurs at a higher percentage (up to 80%-90%) of
the tr ained athlete’ s aerobic capaci ty.
The muscular component of an aerobic endur ance training
program involves submaximal muscle contractions extended over a
large number of repetitions with little recovery. Therefore, the
relative intensi ty is very low, and the overall volume is very high.
This manner of training encour ages relative increases in aerobic
potential that are similar in type I and type II fibers (167).
Compar ed to type II fibers, type I fibers have a higher preexisting
initial aerobic capaci ty, to which the increase in aerobic potential
from training is added (53). Thus, type I fibers possess an oxidativ e
capaci ty greater than that of type II fibers both before and after
training. Howev er, it should be noted while aerobic endur ance
training has been found to encour age relative increases in aerobic
potential that are similar in type I and type II fibers (167), such
training has also been found to reduce type I and type II fiber size
while maintaining or improving the functional ability of the fibers
(157). After 13 weeks of marathon running training, a reduction of
20% in muscle fiber size in both fiber types was found, while
strength in both fiber types was maintained and actual ly increased
by 18% in t ype II a fibers f ollowing a thr ee-week taper (157).
Little evidence shows that type II fibers change into type I fibers
as a result of aerobic endur ance training, but there may be a gradual
conversion within the two major type II fiber subgr oups of type IIx
fibers to type IIa fibers (4, 167). This adaptation is significant, in
that type IIa fibers possess a greater oxidativ e capaci ty than type IIx
fibers and have functional characteristics more similar to those of
type I fibers. Howev er, it should also be noted that hybrid fibers ,
which can have a combination of two or three isoforms (pure fibers),
are also present in skeletal muscles and can experience similar
adaptations (80). Hybrid fibers can increase or decrease depending
on the muscle’ s composi tion before exercise as well as the exercise
stimulus encounter ed (110). In the case of an athlete undertaking
347
aerobic endur ance exercise, for example, a hybrid I/IIa fiber could
transform to a type I fiber (110). This scenario was highlighted by
Trappe and colleagues (157), who examined the impact of aerobic
endur ance training on muscle fiber adaptations in runners
participating in a 16-week marathon training study including a 3-
week taper and marathon. The results showed approximately a 50%
decline in the percentage of hybrid fibers and an increase in the
percentage of type I fibers in the gastrocnemius muscle.  While our
understanding of how hybrid fibers in humans adapt to various
training environments is still evolving, we do know that hybrid fibers
in aerobic endur ance runners are influenced by training volume, and
the content of hybrid fibers (i.e., distribution of MHC isoforms)
differs between longer - versus shorter -distance runners (80).
Further , the abovementioned conversions following  aerobic
endur ance training, whether within fiber type or from hybrid fibers,
results in a more oxidativ e phenotype of the muscle that contributes
to impr oved aer obic endur ance perf ormance.
At the cellular level, muscular adaptations to aerobic exercise
include an increase in the size and number of mitochondria (68) and
increased myoglobin content (26, 64). Myoglobin  is a protein that
transports oxygen within the cell. Mitochondria  are the organel les
in cells that are responsible for aerobical ly producing adenosine
triphosphate (ATP) via oxidation of pyruvate and lactate (the
products of glycolysis) and free fatty acids. When the larger and
more numer ous mitochondria are combined with an increase in the
quanti ty of oxygen that can be delivered to mitochondria by the
greater concentr ation of m yoglobin, the capaci ty of the muscle tissue
to extract and use oxygen is enhanced. This adaptation is further
augmented by increases in the level and activity of the enzymes
involved in oxidativ e metabol ism (73) and a parallel increase in
glycogen (51, 53) and triglyceride (113) stores. Also worth noting is
that aerobic endur ance training can spare muscle glycogen (less
glycogen use during exercise) and increase fat use within the
muscle, which helps prolong performance at the same exercise
348
intensi ty (71). The training induced an increase in fat use attributed
to the increase in fat-metabol izing enzymes and greater
mitochondrial respiratory capaci ty within the exercising muscles
(108).
Bone and Connective Tissue Adaptations
The selection of different forms of aerobic exercise has met with
some success in bringing about improvements in bone mass. Aerobic
programs that are the most successful in stimulating bone growth
involve more intense physical activities such as running  and high-
intensi ty aerobics (12, 17). Running promotes bone growth more
effectively than other types of aerobic exercises such as cycling and
swimming. This is due to the repetitive high-impact loading that
occurs during running, in which the body experiences forces several
times its own weight. In contrast, cycling and swimming are weight -
supported activities that place minimal strain on the skeletal system,
resulting in less stimulation for bone growth (150). In fact, non-
weight -bearing aerobic exercise can reduce bone density, particularly
in areas not used to produce locomotion. For example, in a study
comparing athletes who were runners, cyclists, or both, it was
reported that individuals who were runners had greater total and leg
bone miner al density when  compar ed to non-ex ercising control
participants, while cyclists had a reduced lower spine bone miner al
density than the non-ex ercising control group, and those in both
groups had greater total and arm bone miner al density compar ed to
non-ex ercising control participants (150). These findings suggest
that a sport like cycling may not produce enough strain to improve
bone mass not directly related to locomotion. As such, the inclusion
of other weight -bearing activities is likely warranted to help
counter act the potential reductions in bone mass associated with
non-weight -bearing activities (150). This resear ch highlights that
skeletal adaptations brought about by aerobic endur ance training are
specific to the activity under taken and, more specifically, the axial
loading that the activi ty induces.
349
The key to the success of aerobic exercise in stimulating new
bone formation is that the activity must be significantly more intense
than the daily activities the person normal ly engages in so as to
exceed the minimum threshold intensi ty, as well as at a cyclical
strain to exceed the minimum  and strain frequency for bone growth
(12). The intensi ty of the activity must systematical ly increase in
order to contin ually overload  the bone. Eventual ly, it may become
difficult to overload bone through aerobic exercise when the oxygen
transport system rather than limitations of the musculosk eletal
system restricts the progression to new exercise intensi ty. Bone
responds to the magni tude and rate of external loading. Therefore,
to enhance the stimulus to the musculosk eletal system, it is also
necessary to increase the rate of limb movement. Using high-
intensi ty interv al training techniques is one method of providing a
greater osteo genic stimulus while still providing the benefi ts
associated with aerobic exercise (14, 39). Another method to
increase the musculosk eletal system stimulus is to combine aerobic
endur ance training with resistance training, a known stimulus for
improving bone mass (107) , in what is commonly referred to as
concurrent training  (146) (refer to chapter 21 for more
information).
In matur e adults, the extent to which tendons, ligaments, and
cartilage grow and become stronger is proportional to the intensi ty
of the exercise stimulus, especial ly from weight -bearing activities
(119). Tendons and ligaments consist of bundles of collagen-
containing fibers that increase in number , size, and density following
consistent exercise stimulation (44). As with bone and muscle,
exercise intensi ty that consis tently exceeds the strain placed on the
connectiv e tissues during normal daily activities is needed to create
connectiv e tissue changes. An example of the positive effects of
weight -bearing activity on cartilage is evidenced in a typical knee
joint, where the surfaces of the joint that experience the greatest
degree of weight bearing are thicker than the non-weight -bearing
surfaces (119) . Complete movement through a full range of motion
350
during weight bearing is likely essential to maintain tissue viability
(148).
Aerobic exercise, particularly running, has received a lot of
resear ch attention due not only to the health benefi ts it can provide
but also because of suggest ions that habitual running can have a
negativ e impact on joints like the knees and hips, increasing the risk
of cartilage damage and osteoarthri tis. While mixed or inconclusiv e
findings on the impact of running on knee health have been reported
(154), a study  evaluating thousands of non-el ite male and female
runners across the life span (ages from 12 to over 50) reported that
running did not increase the odds of knee pain or sympto matic knee
osteoarthri tis (97). Similarly, a study has reported that running does
not increase the risk of symptomatic knee osteoarthri tis compar ed to
non-running activities (98). In individuals without preexisting
osteoarthri tis, running does not appear to harm the knees (98).
Moreover, some resear ch suggests that running may even offer
protection against gener al knee pain (29). This protection may be
associated with the improved periarticular strength, not to mention
proprioception that comes wi th the running motion (98).
In studies of elite aerobic endur ance-tr ained athletes, the results
are similar to those of lesser-trained runners. For example, in a
study of over 2,000 former elite athletes, it was found that those
from a power and mixed-sports backgr ound (e.g., soccer, basketball,
track and field) had an increased rate of hospital admissions for
prematur e osteoarthri tis compar ed to aerobic endur ance athletes
(e.g., long-distance runners), who also experienced admissions but
at a notably older age (90). A similar finding was reported in another
study of various former athletes including elite male aerobic
endur ance and track and field athletes, where it was found that
aerobic endur ance athletes reported fewer hip issues than control
subjects (78). It has been suggested that aerobic endur ance athletes
may benefi t from having a lower body mass index, which assists in
preventing osteoarthri tis, along with having a more physical ly active
lifestyle, which may assist with a higher -than- average life
351
expectancy , thus explaining the later onset of osteoart hritis, if it
does occur (90). While these studies did not highlight any notable
differences in the outcomes between the elite and non-el ite running
athletes, it has been suggest ed that the level of exposur e may be a
risk factor for knee osteoart hritis (98), as a result of the duration,
intensi ty, and f requency of tr aining.
Endocrine Ad aptations
Just as endocrine responses to resistance training are needed for
muscle development (87), the changes in hormone production that
contribute to the body’s adaptation to aerobic exercise are equal ly
important (45, 46, 82, 108, 113). Testoster one, insulin, insulin-like
growth factors (IGF-1), and growth hormone affect the integri ty of
muscle, bone, and connectiv e tissue as well as assist in maintaining
metabol ism within a norma l range (40, 41, 84, 85, 158). The
endocrine adaptations following aerobic endur ance training vary
according to the level of exercise intensi ty and duration, with some
hormonal responses increasing while others decrease, as outlined in
the following.
High-intensi ty aerobic training augments the absolute secretion
rates of many hormones in response to maximal exercise, although
trained athletes have attenua ted hormonal responses to submaximal
exercise (103). Howev er, the hormonal response of trained athletes
is similar to an untrained person when performing aerobic endur ance
exercise at the same relative submaximal exercise intensi ty (108).
The greater hormonal response patterns to maximal exercise appear
to augment the athlete’ s ability to tolerate and sustain prolonged
high-intensi ty exercise (170). When exercise intensi ty is very high
and exercise duration is very short (from 5-10 s), only “fight -or-
flight” changes in peripher al blood hormone concentr ations occur
(e.g., epinephrine and nor epinephrine concentr ations incr ease) (86).
The key to endocrine responses, and hence adaptations for
aerobic endur ance athletes, may be the interaction between training
variables such as volume and intensi ty plus the duration of the
352
activity and its influence on energy supply . Over the course of a
season, high-level male aerobic endur ance runners’ basal
concentr ations of certain hormones (e.g., testoster one and insulin)
may change and be more sensitive to variances in training
parameters such as intensi ty and distance run each week than
hormones such as cortisol (1). Further , these responses may also be
influenced by energy availability, with basal testoster one
concentr ations decreasing for athletes who ran a greater number of
miles and had low energy availability (1). Additional ly, resear ch on
elite rowers has demonstr ated that certain hormones (testoster one
and cortisol) may be more sensitive to changes in training volume
than hormones such as growth hormone (129). Also worth noting is
that low energy availability can affect the degree of protein
involvement in aerobic endur ance exercise, particularly during bouts
of long duration (94). Therefore, consider ation must be given over
the course of a season as to how the training variables are
manipulated and energy supplies are affected, not to mention how
an athlete recovers (i.e., type of recovery strategies emplo yed
including nutrition), because these factors will determine the
endocrine response as well as the adaptations experienced during
and after training. An import ant point related to all this information
is what is known as relative energy deficiency in sport (RED- S). For
more detai l, see chapter 11 .
Aerobic training, especial ly running, is often associated with an
acute increase in net protein breakdown from the muscle (155),
brought about in part by acute stress-induced cortisol secretion
(142, 143) despite concomi tant increases in anabol ic hormones such
as testoster one and IGF-1 (160). Howev er, evidence suggests that
net protein synthesis in skeletal muscle of aerobic endur ance-tr ained
athletes does occur and may lead to muscle hypertr ophy (81), but it
is most likely due to mitochondrial rather than contractile proteins
(161, 166). Further , the turnover rate of mitochondrial proteins and
myofibrillar proteins may be different, which may influence the
recovery capac ity of the muscle after exercise (145). This may be
353
due to the impact that protein ingestion has on recovery following
different forms of aerobic endur ance training such as high- and low-
intensi ty sessions; some evidence suggests that the combination of
these variables may alter the timing (i.e., give preference to one
pathway over another) and rate of muscle protein synthesis of
myofibrillar and mitochondri al proteins (145). Conseque ntly, these
protein pathways can also be influenced by exercise–nutrient
interactions, especial ly in the early stages of recovery after exercise,
hence the importance of post-exercise recovery nutrition that
incorpor ates the ingestion of high-qual ity proteins in addition to
carboh ydrates (145).
354
Adaptations to Aerobic Endurance
Training
Much resear ch has been done on training adaptations associated
with aerobic endur ance exercise (5, 15, 20, 34, 42, 65, 66, 161).
Aerobic metabol ism plays a vital role in human performance and is
basic to all sports, if for no other reason than recovery (156).
Metabol ically, the Krebs cycle and electr on transport chain are the
main pathways in aerobic energy production. Aerobic metabol ism
produces far more ATP energy than anaer obic metabol ism and uses
fats, carboh ydrates, and (minimal ly) proteins as fuel sources for
gener ating ATP. Many sports involve interactions between the
aerobic and anaer obic metabol ic systems and thus require
appropriate training. For example, soccer, lacrosse, basketball, field
hockey, and ice hockey involve continuous movement (and thus
constant aerobic demand) mixed with bursts of sprint and power
activities. Proper condi tioning of the aerobic system is vital to the
athlete’ s ability to sustain such activity and adequately recover within
and between ex ercise sessions.
What Improvements in Performance
Result From Aerobic Exercise?
The body systems affected by aerobic exercise include musculosk eletal,
cardiovascular , and r espiratory. Adaptations include the f ollowing:
•  Respiratory system.  Decreased submaximal r espiration r ate (37).
•  Cardiovascular system.  Decreased heart rate for fixed submaximal
workloads (131) associated with increased stroke volume and cardiac output.
Blood (plasma) volume is also increased, supporting increased stroke volume and
cardiac output (55). Hemoglobin  mass also increases but not the percentage of
hemoglobin (i.e., hematocri t), which may decrease slightly due to the relatively
greater incr ease in plasma v olume (140).
•  Musculoskeletal system.  Increased arterial– venous O2 difference
associated with increased capillarizatio n in muscle (136, 153), increased oxidativ e
enzyme concentr ations, and incr eased mi tochondrial siz e and densi ty (70).
355
•  Aerobic power (maximal oxygen uptake).  Arguably the most significant
change in physiological variables with aerobic exercise training is an increase in
maximal oxygen uptak e (V̇O2max), the criterion index of cardiovascular fitness.
The V̇O2max is determined in part by genet ics and by the training program
undertak en by the athlete. Elite athletes may show minor changes in V̇O2max with
training (5%-10%), while untrained individuals may increase V̇O2max by as much
as 20% (67, 75). A high V̇O2max coupled with increased lactate threshold allows
enhanced performance for running sports as well as sports requiring intermi ttent
sprinting (soc cer, bask etball, and other team sports).
•  Lactate threshold.  Aerobic training increases the absolute lactate threshold,
allowing the highly trained individual to work at both a higher relative and absolute
percentage of his or her V̇O2max than a less-tr ained individual. This increased
tolerance of lactate translates into a variety of performance outcomes; these
include running at a higher percentage of V̇O2max for a race (resulting in reduced
time), covering more distance during a game, enhanced recovery for secon d-half
performance, and working at higher exercise intensi ties throughout an event. The
importance of having a high lactate threshold can be seen in the following
example. Two individuals can have the same V̇O2max, perhaps 50 mL · kg−1 ·
min−1; however, if one has a lactate threshold of 80% of V̇O2max (i.e., threshold
occurs at 40 mL · kg−1 · min−1) whereas the other’s occurs at 70% (i.e., 35 mL ·
kg−1 · min−1), the first individual will be able to maintain a power output
equiv alent to 5 mL · kg−1· min−1 higher than the second individual. All other things
being equal, such as exercise econom y, this would result in a greater speed of
movement and thus superior perf ormance.
•  Effective use of substrate.  Carboh ydrates are the preferred source of fuel
for high-intensi ty intermi ttent exercise in many team sports. Aerobic exercise
training results in a greater use of fat as a substr ate for exercise with a relative
sparing of carboh ydrate. With a sparing of carboh ydrate (i.e., reduced glycogen
depletion), an aerobic endur ance-tr ained individual can maintain higher -intensi ty
exercise for longer periods of time. Aerobic exercise may be further improved
through various carboh ydrate-loading  manipulations to increase endogenous
glycogen stor es (19).
•  Muscle fiber adaptations.  When muscle fibers are examined cross-
sectional ly, elite distance runners have a higher proportion (percentage) of type I
fibers, and the available type I fibers  are functional ly very efficient for aerobic
metabol ism (increased mitochondrial density and oxidativ e enzyme capaci ty [69]
and capillary network for oxygen delivery). Aerobic exercise training, especial ly
long-distance and high-intensi ty interm ittent exercise, results in an increase in the
oxidativ e capacity of type I fibers. Resear ch indicates that after a period of aerobic
endur ance training such as marathon training, there is a shift toward type I fibers
associated with the higher volume of aerobic endur ance training. The oxidativ e
phenot ype type I/IIa fibers also increase, while type IIa and IIa/x decrease in both
vastus lateralis and soleus. Howev er, it should be consider ed that certain muscles
356
may have a highe r propensi ty for fiber shifting and other factors such as the
tapering or other phase of training may affect these shifts (125, 102). From a
performance standpoint, these metab olic and fiber changes result in a more
efficient use of aer obic ener gy production.
•  Exercise economy.  The economy of exercise is mostly  a function of
biomechanics and technique, which are influenced by the athlete’ s metabol ic,
cardiovascular , and neuromuscular efficiency and training (7). Two aerobic
endur ance athletes may have the same maximal oxygen uptak e and lactate
threshold yet not show the same performance outcomes. The athlete with better
econom y would be able to race at a higher target pace or power for the same
amount of energy consumption, likely resulting in a better performance,  even
though the two athletes ha ve the same  V̇O2max and lactate thr eshold (23).
Every athlete needs a basic level of aerobic endur ance—i f not for
performance, for health reasons—that can be achiev ed using a wide
variety of training modal ities and programs (see chapter 21 for more
information). Apart from the stereotypical submaximal aerobic
training methods, another method that can produce significant gains
in aerobic fitness (e.g., increased V̇O2max, lactate threshold) is
interv al training (16, 42, 92).
One of the most measur ed adaptations to aerobic endur ance
training is an increase in maximal oxygen uptak e associated with an
increase in maximal cardiac output (15, 31, 65, 161). As the
intensi ty of exercise increases, oxygen consumption rises to maximal
levels. When oxygen consum ption can no longer increase to meet
the demands, maximal oxygen uptak e has been achiev ed even in
the presence of continuing oxygen availability. Aerobic endur ance
training can improve an athlete’ s aerobic power by 5% to 30%,
depending, in part, on the starting fitness level as well as the genetic
potential of the individual (5). Most adaptations in maximal oxygen
consumption can be achiev ed within a 6- to 12-month training
period. After that, further changes in aerobic endur ance
performance consist of increases in exercise economy  and
increased lactate threshold (75). Metabol ic changes include
increased respiratory capaci ty, lower blood lactate concentr ations at
a given submaximal exercise intensi ty, increased mitochondrial and
357
capillary densities, and improved enzyme activity. It may be that
experienced athletes do not experience further increases in their
V̇O2max through chronic aerobic endur ance training but that their
performance impr oves due to enhanced ex ercise econom y (15, 66).
The intensi ty of training is one of the most important factors in
improving and maintaining aerobic power . Short, high-intensi ty bouts
of interval sprints can improve maximal oxygen uptak e if the interim
rest period is also short. A repeated sprint-sequence interval
session  can generally be defined as at least two short bouts of ≥10
seconds with a short recovery period of ≤60 seconds; howev er, this
will depend on the athletes’ goals (50). Callister and colleagues (20)
demonstr ated that long rest periods used with sprints improve sprint
speed without significant increases in maximal aerobic power .
Therefore, longer training sessions with higher amounts of rest
between exercise bouts result in less improvement in aerobic
capaci ty. The use of shorter recovery periods between high-intensi ty
training interv als has been shown in various studies to improve
various skeletal muscle metabol ic processes, resulting in improved
aerobic endur ance perf ormance (48).
Aerobic endur ance training is gener ally associated with alterations
in body composi tion, assuming appropriate nutritional intake.
Aerobic endur ance training usually decreases the relative percentage
of body fat but has little or no significant effect on fat-free mass.
Longer -term programs can result in greater decreases in the
percentage of body fat (15, 34, 73). Excessiv e training may lead to a
predominance of catabol ic activity in the body and cause an
imbalance between catabol ic and anabol ic processes (141).
Aerobic endurance training results in reduced body fat,
increased maximal oxygen uptake, increased exercise
economy, increased respiratory capacity, lower blood
lactate concentrations at submaximal exercise,
increased mitochondrial and capillary densities, and
improved enzyme activity.
358
Table 6.2 lists the physiological changes that occur with short-
term (three- to six-month) aerobic endur ance training and compar es
the results for previously untrained and elite aerobic endur ance
athletes.
359
External and Individual Factors
Influencing Adaptations to Aerobic
Endurance Training
A variety of external and individual factors can influenc e both the
acute responses and the chronic adaptations of the cardiovascular
and respiratory systems to exercise. The effects of altitude, heat,
hyperoxic breathing, smoking, vaping, and blood doping  (external
factors), as well as genetic potential (individual factor), are briefly
described in this section.
Altitude
At elevations greater than 3,900 feet (1,189 m), acute physiological
adjustments begin to occur to compensate for the reduced partial
pressure of oxygen in the atmospher e (61). Figure 6.1 presents the
adjustments to altitude hypoxia  that are immediate and longer
term. Two adjustments that occur early in the acclimatization
process are particularly important. First, there is an increase in
pulmonary ventilation (hyperventilation ) at rest and during
exercise. This increase in ventilation is primari ly the result of
increased breathing frequency . With longer stays at high elevation,
howev er, increased tidal volume also contributes to augmented
ventilation. Stabilization of ventilation is dependent on the level of
altitude and the duration at altitude (77). Second, in the early stages
of altitude exposur e, cardiac output at rest and during submaximal
exercise increases, due prima rily to increases in heart rate (61, 108).
Submaximal heart rate and cardiac output can increase 30% to 50%
above sea-lev el values, and stroke volume is constant or slightly
reduced. Increased submaximal cardiac output reflects the need for
increased blood flow at a time when arterial blood oxygen content is
reduced in order to maintain adequate oxygen delivery to the
tissues.
360
TABLE 6.2  Physiological Variables in Aerobic
Endurance Training
VariablePREVIOUSLY
UNTRAINED
SUBJECTSHIGHLY TRAINED OR
ELITE SUBJECTS
Before After Male Female
HEART RATE (BEATS/MIN)
Resting (127 , 135, 59) 76.4 57.0 45 51
Maximal (127 , 135, 165) 192.8 190.8 196 193.9
STROKE VOLUME (ML)
Resting (135, 169) 79 76 147 133
Maximal (135, 169, 165) 104 120 187 129.6
CARDIAC OUTPUT (L/MIN)
Resting (135, 169, 149) 5.7 4.4 8.2 6.7
Maximal (135, 169, 165) 20.0 22.8 33.8 23.5
Heart v olume (mL) (127 , 135, 149) 860 895 1104 859
BLOOD PRESSURE (MMHG) (127, 135)
Resting (127 , 135) 131/75 144/78 112/75 115/70
Maximal (127 , 127a, 135) 204/81 201/74 188/77 180/74
PULMONARY VENTILATION (BODY TEMPERATURE [37 °C] AND PRESSURE
[AMBIENT], SATURATED [47 MMHG]) (L/MIN)
Resting (127 , 135) 10.9 12.0 11.8 —
Maximal (56a, 127 , 135) 128.7 156.4 164.4 120
ARTERIOVENOUS OXYGEN
DIFFERENCE (ML/100 ML)
Resting (165) 5.8 7.5 — —
Maximal (135, 169, 165) 16.2 17.1 15.9 17.6
*Data ar e not f rom a tr aining study; subjects wer e untr ained or “good distance runners. ”
Data compi led by Carwyn Sharp and K ate Baldwin.
361
Maximal o xygen uptak e (mL · kg−1
· min−1) (127 , 135, 18, 74)36.0 48.0 90.6 72.8
% type I fibers (3, 24 , 59) 48 51 60.8 60.4-61.8
FIBER AREA ( μM2)
Type I (35) 4,947* 6,284* 6,485 6,069
Type II (35) 5,460* 6,378* 8,342 5,642
CAPILLARY DENSITY
Number/mm2 (3, 63) 289 356 640 —
Number/fiber (3) 1.39 1.95 2.15 —
SKELETAL MUSCLE ENZYMES
Citrate synthase ( μmol · min−1·
g−1 wet weight) (162)35.9 45.1 — —
Lactate deh ydrogenase ( μmol · g−1
· min−1) (35, 24)843* 788* 746 744
Succinate deh ydrogenase ( μmol ·
g−1 · min−1) (35)6.4* 17.7* 21.6 10.0
Phosphof ructokinase ( μmol · g−1 ·
min−1) (52, 53)27.13 58.82 20.1 —
MAXIMAL FIBER SHORTENING VELOCITY (FIBER LENGTHS)
Type I (61, 157) 0.99 1.27 1.65 —
Type II (61, 157) 3.18 3.38 3.72 —
*Data ar e not f rom a tr aining study; subjects wer e untr ained or “good distance runners. ”
Data compi led by Carwyn Sharp and K ate Baldwin.
Within 10 to 14 days at a given altitude, heart rate and cardiac
output begin to return to normal values because of the longer -term
acclimatization  response of increased red blood cell production.
Thus, with acute exposur e to altitude, hyperv entilation and
increased submaximal cardiac output are rapid and relatively
effective responses to offset the challenges of the reduced partial
362
pressure of oxygen. Howev er, despite these adjustments, during this
acute period, arterial oxygen saturation decreases and results in
decreases in maximal oxygen uptak e and aerobic performance at
altitudes above 3,900 feet (1,189 m). Acclimatization changes revert
in about one month after return to sea level. As indicated in figure
6.1, chronic physiological and metabol ic adjustments that occur
during a pr olonged al titude exposur e include
increased formation of hemoglobin (gener ally 5%-15%
increase, although higher values have been reported) and red
blood cel ls (30%-50% incr ease),
increased diffusing capaci ty of oxygen through the pulmonary
membr anes,
maintenance of the acid–base balance of body fluids by renal
excretion of HCO 3− and thr ough h yperv entilation, and
increased capi llarization.
All these adaptations gener ally improve tolerance of the relative
hypoxia at medium and high altitudes (58, 61, 108) and may result
in nearly sea-le vel exercise capaci ties with adequate acclimatization.
A minim um of three to six weeks is needed to adapt at moder ate
altitude (2,200  to 3,000 ft [608 to 914 m]). Howev er, reduced
performance, compar ed to sea level, is gener ally expected with
altitude exposur e regardless of the period of acclimatization.
Strength and condi tioning professionals are encour aged to inform
athletes of both expected acute responses and chronic adaptations
to altitude so that they can maintain appropriately adjusted training
regimens and a posi tive mental appr oach to the impact of al titude.
363
FIGURE 6.1  A summary of the immediate and long-term adjustments to al titude h ypoxia.
Heat Acclimatization
The physiologic responses to aerobic exercise depend on the
environmental condi tions in which an athlete is exercising.
Consequently , high environmental temper atures and humidi ty cause
significant alterations to heart rate, oxygen uptak e, minute
ventilation, and blood lactate responses and, ultimately , performance
due to interactions between the environmental condi tions and an
athlete’ s therm oregulatory systems (117). If these environmental
condi tions are hot and dry or warm/hot and humid and produce a
sufficient level of heat stress, performance can be impair ed due to a
cascade of thermor egulator y responses including an increase in
sweat rate and blood flow to the skin to facilitate greater heat
transfer to the environment.  Such a process is in competi tion with
increasing skeletal muscle blood flow to meet the metabol ic
demands of active muscle (54) and thus restrains blood flow
364
availability for oxygen and nutrient delivery and metabol ic by-
product removal in exercising muscle. If this process continues long
enough without sufficient fluid intake, dehydration can result, further
compounding the issue and putting the athlete under greater
physiological and thermor egulatory stress, leading to further
compr omised performance (54). Howev er, repeated exposur e over a
long period of time (often referred to as natural exposu re) to a hot
environment can result in thermor egulatory and physiological
adaptations referred to as heat acclimatization , which can
improve an athlete’ s heat tolerance (10). An athlete can undertak e
heat acclimation  protocols (often referred to as artificial exposur e)
to expose the body to such hot environments, thereby raising core
and skin temper atures and increase sweating to elicit the same
adaptations (124).
The body under goes a number of well-known chronic
thermor egulatory and physiological changes during the heat
acclimatization process. These adaptations include an earlier onset
of sweating in conjunction with an increase in sweat  rate and
evaporative cooling, a reduction in resting and exercising skin and
core body temper ature, an expansion in plasma volume and hence
an increase in blood volume, a reduction in resting and exercising
heart rate, and a reduction in gastrointestinal distress (49). A
summary of the adaptations to thermor egulatory and performance
physiology following aerobic exercise in the heat are outlined in
figure 6.2.
365
FIGURE 6.2 A summ ary of the adaptations to thermor egulatory and performance
physiology f ollowing aer obic ex ercise in the heat.
Reprinted from O.R. Gibson, C.A. Mee, J.A. Willmott, et al., “Heat Alleviation Strategies for Athletic Performance: A
Review and Practitioner Guidelines,” Temperature 7, no. 1 (2019): 3-36. © 2019 The Authors. Published by Informa
UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group. Distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
The benefit of these physiological adaptations is that the athlete
not only has an improved heat tolerance ability via an improved
thermor egulatory system, but such adaptations have also been
found to improve time-trial performance (57, 99) and improve
maximal oxygen uptak e and power output at lactate threshold (99).
Additional ly, the athlete’ s perception of effort and level of thermal
comfort have also been found to be improved following heat
acclimation (49). Howev er, in a review by Rahimi and colleagues
(130) of the physiological responses to heat acclimation  across 11
randomiz ed controlled trials with 215 participants, it was reported
that heat acclimation was effective for improving time-trial
366
performance as well as reducing time-trial heart rate and maximal
heart rate, despite there being no beneficial effect on maximal
oxygen uptak e, core or mean skin temper ature, plasma volume, or
blood lactate, nor meaningf ul effects on rating of perceived exertion
or thermal comfort. The differences between studies and whether
improvements were observ ed with respect to heat acclimation may
be related to the environmental condi tions (i.e., warm or hot, dry or
humid), intensi ty of the exercise used, the acclimation protocols that
the athletes were exposed  to, and the initial level of athlete
acclimation, all of which determine the degree of thermor egulatory
and ph ysiological adaptations (124).
Heat acclimation adaptations start to occur quickly once exposed
to the hot environment and continue for the duration of the process.
Howev er, it needs to be noted that heat acclimation adaptations do
not all occur at the same rate, with some occurring more quickly
than others and some (e.g., sweat rate) continuin g as the
acclimation period continues (124). The time course of the
physiological adaptations to heat acclimation are outlined in figure
6.3. The physiological changes to the thermor egulatory system start
to occur very quickly , commencing from the first day of exposur e
(124) and continuing over subsequent days, with the majori ty of the
adaptations (~75%) reported to occur within the first four to six
days (121).
Unfortunately , heat acclimation–induced thermor egulatory and
physiological adaptations are transient and relatively short-term, and
after leaving the hot environment the changes start to dissipate after
only a few days or weeks depending on the length of the exposur e
(47). While a lot is known  about the heat acclimation process,
consider ably less is known about the decay rate of the adaptations
(49). Original ly, it was proposed that for each day of a heat
acclimation protocol, the adaptation would be retained for two days
(96). Howev er, more recent resear ch indicates that for every day
that passes without exposur e to the heat, there is a 2.5% loss of
adaptations (28). The adaptations also decay at different rates and
367
coincide with the rate of adaptation; that is, those that adapted
quickly also decay quickly (122). Typical ly, full heat acclimation
adaptations are expected to be lost after a month if there is no
repeated exercise heat stress (128). It also appears that the loss of
adaptations may be affected  by the level of exercise undertak en
after heat acclimation. Consequently , it is recomme nded that
athletes mainta in their training in the days after heat acclimation to
assist retaining their thermor egulatory and physiological adaptations
(128).
It has also been reported that the heat acclimation adaptations
may remain longer for those athletes acclimatiz ed in dry, hot
environments compar ed to humid, hot environments (121).
Unfortunately , little resear ch has been conducted on the
transferability of adaptations between different hot environments
(e.g., hot and dry to warm and humid). Howev er, in one of the few
studies to investigate this aspect of heat acclimation, it was found
that cross-adaptation from one environment to the other is
achiev able (56), an important point worth noting for athletes who
train and compete in di fferent hot en vironments.
368
FIGURE 6.3  The time course of the ph ysiological adaptations to heat ac climation.
Reprinted by permission from J.D. Périard, S. Racinais, and M.N. Sawka, “Adaptations and Mechanisms of Human Heat
Acclimation: Applications for Competitive Athletes and Sports,” Scandinavian Journal of Medicine & Science in Sports,
25 (2015).
Two other factors to consider with respect to heat acclimation are
the influence of the level of aerobic fitness and biological sex. There
is evidence to suggest that athletes who have a higher level of
aerobic fitness have a greater ability to exercise in the heat due to
the ability to tolerate higher core body temper atures (124) and may
also better retain their heat acclimation adaptations (121). With
respect to sex, differences are observ ed in the physiological
responses to exercise in the heat between males and females.
Females have been found to experience greater increases in body
temper ature in the heat due to a lower total body sweat response
when compar ed to males (43). This difference in sweat rate is
attributed to a smaller increase in sweat rate for a given increase in
body temper ature (i.e., lower thermosensi tivity) (43). It has also
been observ ed that while both females and males respond to short-
term heat acclimation protocols, females may require a slightly
longer protocol to establ ish thermor egulatory and cardiovascular
stability (111).
369
With this information in mind, strength and conditioning
professionals need to consider the type of heat acclimatio n protocol
that they will emplo y, the proximity of the heat acclimation protocol
to the athlete’ s competi tion, and the training status and sex of the
athlete with whom they are working, in order to maximiz e the
potential benefi ts from the acclimation environment to the
competi tion environment. More information on heat acclimation
protocols and the different types and consider ations when
implementing such pr otocols ar e outl ined in chapter 21 .
Altitude or Heat: Which Training Protocol
Should an Athlete Undertake?
Before answer ing this question, it is important to understand how
the two types of training protocols differ in terms of adaptations.
Heat acclimation training has become popular with aerobic
endur ance athletes, often as an alternativ e to altitude training due to
less expense and easier access to hot versus altitude training
environments. While evidence suggests that heat acclimation can
improve maximal oxygen uptak e in thermoneutral  (164) and hot
environments (99, 163) as well as performance in thermoneutr al
(112) and hot environments (57, 99), the changes are not due to the
same physiological mechanisms brought about by altitude training
(hypoxic exposur e).
Training at altitude causes exposur e to a hypobaric -hypoxic
environment and a reduction  in an athlete’ s arterial oxygen content,
which sets off a sequence of events starting with an increase in the
amount of hypoxia-inducible factor and the subsequent expression
of the genes associated with the transcription of erythropoietin
(EPO)  and nitric oxide (6). The increased concentr ations of EPO
bring about changes in red cell volume and hemoglobin mass, which
increase the oxygen-carrying capaci ty of the blood as well as
increase the arterio venous oxygen difference, which can provide an
improvement in maximal aerobic capaci ty and subsequent aerobic
endur ance performance (6). In comparison, heat acclimation training
370
targets changes in the thermor egulatory system via increases in core
body temperature, which in turn brings about a reduction in central
venous pressure and renal perfusion and subsequent increase in
aldoster one secretion (6). The result of this process is a sudden and
large expansio n in plasma volume, which in turn increases stroke
volume and hence is proposed to improve maximal aerobic capaci ty
and subsequent aerobic endurance performance (6). A graphical
representation of the proposed physiological mechanisms  of altitude
training and heat acclimation  training and their subsequent effect on
aerobic endur ance ex ercise perf ormance is pr ovided in figure 6.4.
In view of the potential benefi ts to both altitude and heat training
as outlined above, one might think that completing both forms of
training together would provide an athlete with the best of both
worlds—that is, erythropoiesis  from hypoxia stimulation and
plasma volume  expansion from heat acclimation. Unfortunately , the
answer is not that simple, for altitude training can evoke an acute
reduction in plasma volume, which is in contrast with the expansion
of plasma volume experienced with heat acclimation (118). In
addition, the time course of adaptations to altitude (hypoxic
exposur e) and heat acclimatio n appears to be different, with hypoxia
exposur e gener ally requiring slightly longer exposur e times
compar ed to heat ac climation (60).
Resear ch has been conducted to investigate the efficacy of
combining the two forms of training (i.e., heat acclimation with
hypoxic exposur e) on performance in a hot environment using
trained runners (109). Even though heat training combined with
living-high/tr aining-low hypoxia produced a greater physiological
stress, the thermor egulatory adaptations for the combined group
compar ed to an independent heat training group were limited and
found to provide no additional physiological benefi t when exercising
in a hot environment (109). A similar study by Hanson and
colleagues (60) comparing a heat acclimation– alone group with a
group combining heat and hypoxia exposur e on cycling endur ance
performance in a hot environment observ ed similar improvements in
371
performance for short-duration exercise across the groups. The
results of these studies suggest that even though the physiological
adaptations to altitude and heat training may be different, hypoxic
exposur e does not provide any additional benefi t above and beyond
heat acclimatio n as it relates to exercise performance in the heat,
nor does i t impair heat ac climation.
In light of these resear ch findings, which training protocol
(altitude or heat) should an athlete complete? In answering this
question, it is important to remember two points. First,
nonhematological adaptations are directly related to the stresses of
the training environment, and second, the nonhem atological
adaptations to both altitude and heat are specific to the environment
in which the athlete will compete (118). Or put another way, what is
going to have the biggest impact on the athlete’ s performance on
race day, altitude or heat? For example, if an athlete was preparing
for a marathon  to be held at an altitude of 2,500 to 3,000 meters
(8,202-9,843 ft), the answer would be altitude, because the athlete
would notice the change in atmospheric pressure at that altitude if
he or she were from a sea-lev el environment. Howev er, if the athlete
was preparing for a marathon at sea level but in a warm to hot and
humid environment and notably above his or her temper ate, dry
training environment, he or she would be best served by
undertaking a heat acclimation protocol. Consequently , it is
necessary to compar e the training and competi tion environments
and consider the athlete’ s current level of adaptations to determine
what adaptations should be optimiz ed to improve performance on
race day. Irrespectiv e of the training method selected to prepare an
athlete for competi tion, establ ishing how each athlete adapts and
providing individual ized programs to optimiz e adaptations is
important, because not all athletes will respond to altitude and heat
protocols the same (118).
372
FIGURE 6.4 A graphical representation of the proposed physiological mechanisms of
altitude and heat acclimation training and their subsequent effect on aerobic endur ance
exercise performan ce. Erythr opoietin = EPO; nitric oxide = NO; red cell volume = RCV;
vascular endothel ial growth factor = VEGF; hypoxia-inducible factor alpha = HIF-α; maximal
aerobic capaci ty = V̇O2max; arterio venous  oxygen difference = a-vO2 diff. Solid lines
indicate well-establ ished relationship and dashed lines indicate limited evidence supporting
the relationship .
Adapted by permission from M.N. Baranaus kas, K. Constantini, H.L. Paris, et al., “Heat Versus Altitude Training for
Endurance Performance at Sea Level,” Exercise and Sport Sciences Reviews 49, no. 1 (2021): 50-58.
373
Hyperoxic Breathing
Breathing oxygen-enriched gas mixtur es (hyperoxic breathing )
during rest periods or following exercise can result in short-term
improvements in oxygen transport, lactate metabol ism, power
output, and work tolerance when compar ed to normoxic
breathing  (21). In contrast, studies  examining the systematic
supplementation of hyperoxic breathing during aerobic endur ance
training over time show contradictory results and overall small
benefi ts (21). Hyper oxic breathing has been proposed to increase
the amount of oxygen carrie d by the blood and therefore increase
the supply of oxygen to working muscles and reduce central fatigue
(21). Howev er, the breathing of ambient air at sea level by healthy
people results in arterial hemoglobin oxygen saturation between
95% to 98%. Thus, the potential for hyperoxic breathing during rest
periods or f ollowing ex ercise has y et to be f ully elucidated (58, 126).
Smoking and Vaping
Relatively little resear ch is available regarding smoking and exercise
performance, possibly because athletes and active individuals may
tend to avoid smoking for fear of impairing performance or
increasing disease risk (100, 123). Howev er, based on the available
evidence, it is clear that smokers experience lower oxygen uptak e,
impair ed heart rate responses to exercise, and a decrease in
muscular endur ance compar ed with nonsmok ers (9, 91). Smok ers
experience impairments in lung function and are at increased risk for
chronic obstruc tive pulmonar y diseases (104, 148) including chronic
bronchi tis (79) and emph ysema (101). Decrements in exercise
tolerance and cardiopulmonary function have been observed in
teenagers (100), demonstr ating that the harmf ul effects of smoking
occur in even young smokers within a relatively short period of time.
The detrimental ef fects of smoking include
increased airway resistance due to nicotine-r elated bronchiole
constriction or increased fluid secretion and swelling in the
374
bronchial tr ee due to the irri tation of smok e; and
paralysis of the cilia on the surfaces of the respiratory tract by
nicotine, which limits the ability to remove excess fluids and
foreign partic les, causing debris to accumulate in the
respiratory passagew ays and adding to the difficulty of
breathing.
Thus, even the light smoker may feel respiratory strain during
exercise and experience a reduction in the level of performance (58,
108).
Carbon mono xide, a component of cigarette smoke, is associated
with an impair ed hemodynamic response to exercise and increased
catecholamine release. Carbon mono xide has a higher affinity for
hemoglobin than does oxygen. The resulting carboxyhemoglobin
(carbon mono xide and hemoglobin) reduces the amount of oxygen
that can be carried by hemoglobin and thus reduces the oxygen that
can be provided to the working muscles. The reduction in oxygen-
carrying capaci ty may reduce maximal exercise capaci ty, and
submaximal cardiovascular responses may increase in an effort to
provide adequate oxygenated blood to the working muscles. The
increased catecholamine release increases heart rate and blood
pressure.
Vaping  refers to the act of inhaling an aerosol often containing
nicotine and flavoring through a device, commonly known as an e-
cigarette or vape pen, which  heats a liquid to gener ate vapor
without the combustion associated with traditional cigarette
smoking. Vaping is currently the most common modal ity of nicotine
consumption in young people , with 27.5% of high school students in
2019 in the United States reportedly vaping (133). The toxicants
found in vapors are reportedly lower in quanti ty when compar ed to
traditional cigarette smoking; howev er, adverse short-term side
effects on the respiratory system have been reported. Resear ch
examining the chronic effects of vaping on lung health and long-
term exercise performance is extremely limited due to the relatively
new widespr ead uptak e of vaping. Currently, no large-scale
375
prospectiv e cohort study has examined the link between vaping and
long-term adverse respiratory outcomes. This is further compl icated
by the large spectrum of vaping options including various flavors,
additives, and nicotine conce ntrations. Howev er, in vaping products
that contain nicotine (over 99% of products), the nicotine-stimulated
catecholamine release can activate receptors in the heart and result
in an increased  heart rate, blood pressure, and cardiac contractility
and workload and, in the long term, can result in changes in
cardiovascular physiology and the development of heart failure and
other associated chr onic heal th issues (133).
Studies examining short-term side effects of vaping report
inflammation and cellular damage in the lungs, leading to decreased
lung capacity and impair ed gas exchange (22, 151), which may in
turn affect performance and recovery times during  exercise.
Howev er, whether these changes are maintained over the long term
and after vaping cessation is still yet to be establ ished. Studies also
demonstr ate that both acute and subacute vaping can exacerbate
both asthma and chronic obstructiv e pulmonary disease and induce
physiological changes in the airways and immune system (159),
which can negativ ely affect performance and recovery in athletes.
Very few studies have exam ined the effect of vaping directly on
aerobic endur ance exercise. In young, healthy adults, regular vaping
use significantly reduced cardiorespiratory fitness, measur ed by
V̇O2peak when compar ed to nonvapers of the same demogr aphic
(142a). The young adults also demonstr ated lower chronotropic
responses and reduced O2 extraction and use during exercises
compar ed to nonusers. In addition, significantly slower 2-mile (3.1
km) run times have been reported in vape users compar ed to
nonvapers, with times also being slower compar ed to traditional
cigarette smokers (30). Additional ly, vaping can cause short-term
increases in heart rate and diastol ic blood pressure primari ly by the
systemic r elease of catecholamines (144).
376
Blood Doping
The practice of artificially increasing red blood cell mass (blood
doping ) as a means  to improve athletic performance has been
criticized as unethical and as one that poses serious health risks to
the athlete (120). Nonetheless, resear ch has suggested that this
practice can improve aerobic exercise performance and may enhance
tolerance of certain en vironmental condi tions (138).
Blood doping can be accompl ished through infusion of an
individual’ s own red blood cells or those from someone else, or
through administr ation of EPO, which stimulates red blood cell
production. Infusion of red blood cells rapidly increases red blood
cell mass but for just a few weeks (116), whereas EPO takes longer
to cause an increase in red blood cell production but the effect lasts
as long as EPO is administer ed (138). In either case, it is theoriz ed
that increasing  red blood cell mass increases the blood’ s ability to
carry oxygen and thus increases oxygen availability to working
muscles. Maximal oxygen uptak e has been demonstr ated to increase
by up to 11% with either red blood cell infusion or EPO
administr ation (138, 139). At standar dized submaximal workloads,
blood doping has also been associated with decreased heart rate
and blood lactate as wel l as higher pH v alues (138).
The effects of blood doping suggest the potential for diminishing
the impact of various environmental condi tions. The effects of
altitude appear to be lessened with blood doping, although as
altitude increases, the positive influence of blood doping is reduced
(132). Environmental stressors such as heat and cold exposur e may
also be affected by blood doping. During heat exposur e, a blood-
doped athlete will be able to tolerate submaximal exercise stress
more easily (76, 137-139). The increased blood volume associated
with increased red blood cell mass allows the body to shunt more
blood to the skin for improved thermor egulation while still providing
sufficient blood to transport oxygen to the working muscles.
Howev er, blood doping appears to confer these benefi ts primari ly to
individuals who are already acclimatiz ed to heat and provides very
377
little aid relating to the response to heat of those who are not
acclimatiz ed (138). Much less is known about blood doping with
respect to cold stress, and although some theoretical benefi t has
been suggested, this practice could conceiv ably increase health risks
(138).
The health risks associated with blood doping further compl icate
the controversy surrounding this practice. Theor etically, high
hematocri t levels may increase risks for embol ic events such as
stroke, myocardial infarction, deep vein thrombosis, or pulmonary
embol ism. Increased arterial blood pressure, flu-like symptoms, and
increased plasma potassium levels may present themselv es with EPO
use (139). Finally, there is risk associated with infusion or
transfusion, al though in most cases the risk is r elatively smal l (139).
Genet ic Potential
The upper limit of an individual’ s genetic potential contributes
significantly to the absolute magni tude of the training adaptations.
The magni tude of change also depends on the current training
status of the individual. Each biological system adaptatio n, such as
that of the cardiovascular system, has an upper limit, and as the
athlete gets closer to that upper limit, smaller and smaller gains are
observ ed. For example, in some elite competi tions (e.g., swimming),
small gains in performance may be the difference between the gold
medal and 26th place. Thus, in an event in which tenths or
hundr edths of a second make a big difference, it may be worth the
extra training time to gain that 0.05% improvement in performance.
Because of the small gains possible with training in elite athletes,
careful program design and monitoring become even more critical
(34, 83, 89, 168).
378
Detraining
Detraining  is defined as the partial or complete loss of training-
induced adaptations in response to an insufficient training stimulus
(114, 115). Detraining is governed by the principle of training
reversibi lity, which states that whereas physical training results in
several physiological adaptations that enhance athletic performance,
stopping or markedly reducing training induces a partial or complete
reversal of these adaptations, compr omising athletic performance. A
distinction needs to be made with regard to cessation of training
that results in a reversal of adaptations and tapering. Tapering  is
the planned reduction of volume of training (usual ly in duration and
frequency but not intensi ty) that occurs before an athletic
competi tion or a planned recovery microcycle. This type of reduction
in training is designed to enhance athletic performance and
adaptations.
Aerobic endur ance adaptations are most sensitive to periods of
inactivi ty because of their enzymatic basis. The exact cellular
mechanisms that dictate detraining changes are unknown, and
further resear ch is needed to clarify the underlying physiological
alterations. Two review articles (114, 115) address the factors that
contribute to aerobic performance, most importantly V̇O2max and
the factors determining V̇O2max (cardiac output and arterio venous
oxygen difference) and the impact of detraining. The authors discuss
the impact of short-term (four weeks) (114) and long-term (more
than four weeks) (115) detraining. In highly trained athletes,
maximal oxygen uptak e is reduced 4% to 14% with short-term (27,
106) and 6% to 20% with long-term detraining (26, 33, 106). The
reduction in V̇O2max is primari ly a result of decreased blood volume
(25), decreased stroke volume (25, 26), decreased maximal cardiac
output (25, 26), and increased submaximal heart rate (25, 31, 33,
105). The decrease in V̇O2max supports  the loss of aerobic
endur ance perf ormance (25, 26, 31, 33, 72, 105).
379
Proper exercise variation, intensity, maintenance
programs, and active recovery periods can adequ ately
protect against serious detraining effects (36).
380
Conclusion
Aerobic endur ance exercise produces many acute cardiovascular and
respiratory responses, and aerobic endur ance training produces
many chronic adaptations. This information can be of particular
value for developing the goals of a condi tioning program and can
provide a basis for clinical evaluation and the selection of parameters
to be include d in such an evaluation process. Knowledge of
cardiovascular , respiratory, nervous, muscular , bone and connectiv e
tissue, and endocrine system responses to aerobic endur ance
training can help the strength and condi tioning professional
understand the scienti fic basis for aerobic condi tioning and the
adaptations to expect and monitor during training. Adaptations to
specific types of exercise stimul i take place in the body. Optimal
adaptations reflect careful design, implementation, and performance
of strength and condi tioning pr ograms.
KEY TERMS
acclimatization
blood doping
bradycardia
carbo xyhemoglobin
concurr ent tr aining
critical power
decay rate
detraining
erythr opoiesis
erythr opoietin (EPO)
exercise econom y
heat ac climation
heat ac climatization
hemoglobin
hybrid fiber
381
hyperoxic br eathing
hyperv entilation
hypoxia
lactate thr eshold
mitochondria
myoglobin
normo xic br eathing
onset of blood lactate ac cumulation (OBL A)
repeated sprint -sequence interv al session
tapering
thermoneutr al
vaping
STUDY QUESTIONS
  1.  Which of the following is not a physiological adaptation to
aerobic endur ance tr aining?
  a.  str oke volume incr eases
  b.  submaximal heart r ate decr eases
  c.  ex ercise econom y incr eases
  d.  fat oxidation decr eases
  2.  During the heat acclimatization process, which of the following
chronic physiological thermor egulatory and performance
changes does an athlete not experience?
  a.  incr ease in plasma v olume
  b.  reduced lactate concentr ation
  c.  decr ease in ev aporative cool ing
  d.  decr ease in ex ercise cor e temper ature
  3.  Which of the following statements is not true concerning
altitude and heat tr aining?
  a.  The time course of adaptations to al titude and heat
acclimation appears to be di fferent, wi th altitude tr aining
gener ally requiring sl ightly longer exposur e times
compar ed to heat ac climation.
382
  b.  Heat en vironments cause exposur e to a h ypoxic
environment and a r eduction in an athlete’ s arterial
oxygen content.
  c.  Heat and al titude tr aining adaptations oc cur in r esponse to
different ph ysiological mechanisms.
  d.  Heat ac climation tr aining tar gets changes in the
thermor egulatory system via incr eases in cor e body
temper ature.
  4.  Which of the f ollowing short -term ef fects is seen after v aping?
  a.  incr eases in heart r ate and diastol ic blood pr essure
  b.  decr eases in heart r ate and systol ic blood pr essure
  c.  an impr ovement in systemic inflammation
  d.  ther e are no short -term negativ e effects f rom vaping
5. Which of the following is not a benefi t seen from hyperoxic
breathing?
a. short-term impr ovements in o xygen tr ansport
b. short-term impr ovements in lactate metabol ism
c. short-term impr ovements in power output
d. short-term impr ovements in ex ercise econom y
383