# Section 6.3

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 6: Adaptations to Aerobic Training

**Section:** 6.3 -- Factors Influencing Adaptations

**PDF Pages:** 371--378

targets changes in the thermor egulatory system via increases in core
body temperature, which in turn brings about a reduction in central
venous pressure and renal perfusion and subsequent increase in
aldoster one secretion (6). The result of this process is a sudden and
large expansio n in plasma volume, which in turn increases stroke
volume and hence is proposed to improve maximal aerobic capaci ty
and subsequent aerobic endurance performance (6). A graphical
representation of the proposed physiological mechanisms  of altitude
training and heat acclimation  training and their subsequent effect on
aerobic endur ance ex ercise perf ormance is pr ovided in figure 6.4.
In view of the potential benefi ts to both altitude and heat training
as outlined above, one might think that completing both forms of
training together would provide an athlete with the best of both
worlds—that is, erythropoiesis  from hypoxia stimulation and
plasma volume  expansion from heat acclimation. Unfortunately , the
answer is not that simple, for altitude training can evoke an acute
reduction in plasma volume, which is in contrast with the expansion
of plasma volume experienced with heat acclimation (118). In
addition, the time course of adaptations to altitude (hypoxic
exposur e) and heat acclimatio n appears to be different, with hypoxia
exposur e gener ally requiring slightly longer exposur e times
compar ed to heat ac climation (60).
Resear ch has been conducted to investigate the efficacy of
combining the two forms of training (i.e., heat acclimation with
hypoxic exposur e) on performance in a hot environment using
trained runners (109). Even though heat training combined with
living-high/tr aining-low hypoxia produced a greater physiological
stress, the thermor egulatory adaptations for the combined group
compar ed to an independent heat training group were limited and
found to provide no additional physiological benefi t when exercising
in a hot environment (109). A similar study by Hanson and
colleagues (60) comparing a heat acclimation– alone group with a
group combining heat and hypoxia exposur e on cycling endur ance
performance in a hot environment observ ed similar improvements in
371
performance for short-duration exercise across the groups. The
results of these studies suggest that even though the physiological
adaptations to altitude and heat training may be different, hypoxic
exposur e does not provide any additional benefi t above and beyond
heat acclimatio n as it relates to exercise performance in the heat,
nor does i t impair heat ac climation.
In light of these resear ch findings, which training protocol
(altitude or heat) should an athlete complete? In answering this
question, it is important to remember two points. First,
nonhematological adaptations are directly related to the stresses of
the training environment, and second, the nonhem atological
adaptations to both altitude and heat are specific to the environment
in which the athlete will compete (118). Or put another way, what is
going to have the biggest impact on the athlete’ s performance on
race day, altitude or heat? For example, if an athlete was preparing
for a marathon  to be held at an altitude of 2,500 to 3,000 meters
(8,202-9,843 ft), the answer would be altitude, because the athlete
would notice the change in atmospheric pressure at that altitude if
he or she were from a sea-lev el environment. Howev er, if the athlete
was preparing for a marathon at sea level but in a warm to hot and
humid environment and notably above his or her temper ate, dry
training environment, he or she would be best served by
undertaking a heat acclimation protocol. Consequently , it is
necessary to compar e the training and competi tion environments
and consider the athlete’ s current level of adaptations to determine
what adaptations should be optimiz ed to improve performance on
race day. Irrespectiv e of the training method selected to prepare an
athlete for competi tion, establ ishing how each athlete adapts and
providing individual ized programs to optimiz e adaptations is
important, because not all athletes will respond to altitude and heat
protocols the same (118).
372
FIGURE 6.4 A graphical representation of the proposed physiological mechanisms of
altitude and heat acclimation training and their subsequent effect on aerobic endur ance
exercise performan ce. Erythr opoietin = EPO; nitric oxide = NO; red cell volume = RCV;
vascular endothel ial growth factor = VEGF; hypoxia-inducible factor alpha = HIF-α; maximal
aerobic capaci ty = V̇O2max; arterio venous  oxygen difference = a-vO2 diff. Solid lines
indicate well-establ ished relationship and dashed lines indicate limited evidence supporting
the relationship .
Adapted by permission from M.N. Baranaus kas, K. Constantini, H.L. Paris, et al., “Heat Versus Altitude Training for
Endurance Performance at Sea Level,” Exercise and Sport Sciences Reviews 49, no. 1 (2021): 50-58.
373
Hyperoxic Breathing
Breathing oxygen-enriched gas mixtur es (hyperoxic breathing )
during rest periods or following exercise can result in short-term
improvements in oxygen transport, lactate metabol ism, power
output, and work tolerance when compar ed to normoxic
breathing  (21). In contrast, studies  examining the systematic
supplementation of hyperoxic breathing during aerobic endur ance
training over time show contradictory results and overall small
benefi ts (21). Hyper oxic breathing has been proposed to increase
the amount of oxygen carrie d by the blood and therefore increase
the supply of oxygen to working muscles and reduce central fatigue
(21). Howev er, the breathing of ambient air at sea level by healthy
people results in arterial hemoglobin oxygen saturation between
95% to 98%. Thus, the potential for hyperoxic breathing during rest
periods or f ollowing ex ercise has y et to be f ully elucidated (58, 126).
Smoking and Vaping
Relatively little resear ch is available regarding smoking and exercise
performance, possibly because athletes and active individuals may
tend to avoid smoking for fear of impairing performance or
increasing disease risk (100, 123). Howev er, based on the available
evidence, it is clear that smokers experience lower oxygen uptak e,
impair ed heart rate responses to exercise, and a decrease in
muscular endur ance compar ed with nonsmok ers (9, 91). Smok ers
experience impairments in lung function and are at increased risk for
chronic obstruc tive pulmonar y diseases (104, 148) including chronic
bronchi tis (79) and emph ysema (101). Decrements in exercise
tolerance and cardiopulmonary function have been observed in
teenagers (100), demonstr ating that the harmf ul effects of smoking
occur in even young smokers within a relatively short period of time.
The detrimental ef fects of smoking include
increased airway resistance due to nicotine-r elated bronchiole
constriction or increased fluid secretion and swelling in the
374
bronchial tr ee due to the irri tation of smok e; and
paralysis of the cilia on the surfaces of the respiratory tract by
nicotine, which limits the ability to remove excess fluids and
foreign partic les, causing debris to accumulate in the
respiratory passagew ays and adding to the difficulty of
breathing.
Thus, even the light smoker may feel respiratory strain during
exercise and experience a reduction in the level of performance (58,
108).
Carbon mono xide, a component of cigarette smoke, is associated
with an impair ed hemodynamic response to exercise and increased
catecholamine release. Carbon mono xide has a higher affinity for
hemoglobin than does oxygen. The resulting carboxyhemoglobin
(carbon mono xide and hemoglobin) reduces the amount of oxygen
that can be carried by hemoglobin and thus reduces the oxygen that
can be provided to the working muscles. The reduction in oxygen-
carrying capaci ty may reduce maximal exercise capaci ty, and
submaximal cardiovascular responses may increase in an effort to
provide adequate oxygenated blood to the working muscles. The
increased catecholamine release increases heart rate and blood
pressure.
Vaping  refers to the act of inhaling an aerosol often containing
nicotine and flavoring through a device, commonly known as an e-
cigarette or vape pen, which  heats a liquid to gener ate vapor
without the combustion associated with traditional cigarette
smoking. Vaping is currently the most common modal ity of nicotine
consumption in young people , with 27.5% of high school students in
2019 in the United States reportedly vaping (133). The toxicants
found in vapors are reportedly lower in quanti ty when compar ed to
traditional cigarette smoking; howev er, adverse short-term side
effects on the respiratory system have been reported. Resear ch
examining the chronic effects of vaping on lung health and long-
term exercise performance is extremely limited due to the relatively
new widespr ead uptak e of vaping. Currently, no large-scale
375
prospectiv e cohort study has examined the link between vaping and
long-term adverse respiratory outcomes. This is further compl icated
by the large spectrum of vaping options including various flavors,
additives, and nicotine conce ntrations. Howev er, in vaping products
that contain nicotine (over 99% of products), the nicotine-stimulated
catecholamine release can activate receptors in the heart and result
in an increased  heart rate, blood pressure, and cardiac contractility
and workload and, in the long term, can result in changes in
cardiovascular physiology and the development of heart failure and
other associated chr onic heal th issues (133).
Studies examining short-term side effects of vaping report
inflammation and cellular damage in the lungs, leading to decreased
lung capacity and impair ed gas exchange (22, 151), which may in
turn affect performance and recovery times during  exercise.
Howev er, whether these changes are maintained over the long term
and after vaping cessation is still yet to be establ ished. Studies also
demonstr ate that both acute and subacute vaping can exacerbate
both asthma and chronic obstructiv e pulmonary disease and induce
physiological changes in the airways and immune system (159),
which can negativ ely affect performance and recovery in athletes.
Very few studies have exam ined the effect of vaping directly on
aerobic endur ance exercise. In young, healthy adults, regular vaping
use significantly reduced cardiorespiratory fitness, measur ed by
V̇O2peak when compar ed to nonvapers of the same demogr aphic
(142a). The young adults also demonstr ated lower chronotropic
responses and reduced O2 extraction and use during exercises
compar ed to nonusers. In addition, significantly slower 2-mile (3.1
km) run times have been reported in vape users compar ed to
nonvapers, with times also being slower compar ed to traditional
cigarette smokers (30). Additional ly, vaping can cause short-term
increases in heart rate and diastol ic blood pressure primari ly by the
systemic r elease of catecholamines (144).
376
Blood Doping
The practice of artificially increasing red blood cell mass (blood
doping ) as a means  to improve athletic performance has been
criticized as unethical and as one that poses serious health risks to
the athlete (120). Nonetheless, resear ch has suggested that this
practice can improve aerobic exercise performance and may enhance
tolerance of certain en vironmental condi tions (138).
Blood doping can be accompl ished through infusion of an
individual’ s own red blood cells or those from someone else, or
through administr ation of EPO, which stimulates red blood cell
production. Infusion of red blood cells rapidly increases red blood
cell mass but for just a few weeks (116), whereas EPO takes longer
to cause an increase in red blood cell production but the effect lasts
as long as EPO is administer ed (138). In either case, it is theoriz ed
that increasing  red blood cell mass increases the blood’ s ability to
carry oxygen and thus increases oxygen availability to working
muscles. Maximal oxygen uptak e has been demonstr ated to increase
by up to 11% with either red blood cell infusion or EPO
administr ation (138, 139). At standar dized submaximal workloads,
blood doping has also been associated with decreased heart rate
and blood lactate as wel l as higher pH v alues (138).
The effects of blood doping suggest the potential for diminishing
the impact of various environmental condi tions. The effects of
altitude appear to be lessened with blood doping, although as
altitude increases, the positive influence of blood doping is reduced
(132). Environmental stressors such as heat and cold exposur e may
also be affected by blood doping. During heat exposur e, a blood-
doped athlete will be able to tolerate submaximal exercise stress
more easily (76, 137-139). The increased blood volume associated
with increased red blood cell mass allows the body to shunt more
blood to the skin for improved thermor egulation while still providing
sufficient blood to transport oxygen to the working muscles.
Howev er, blood doping appears to confer these benefi ts primari ly to
individuals who are already acclimatiz ed to heat and provides very
377
little aid relating to the response to heat of those who are not
acclimatiz ed (138). Much less is known about blood doping with
respect to cold stress, and although some theoretical benefi t has
been suggested, this practice could conceiv ably increase health risks
(138).
The health risks associated with blood doping further compl icate
the controversy surrounding this practice. Theor etically, high
hematocri t levels may increase risks for embol ic events such as
stroke, myocardial infarction, deep vein thrombosis, or pulmonary
embol ism. Increased arterial blood pressure, flu-like symptoms, and
increased plasma potassium levels may present themselv es with EPO
use (139). Finally, there is risk associated with infusion or
transfusion, al though in most cases the risk is r elatively smal l (139).
Genet ic Potential
The upper limit of an individual’ s genetic potential contributes
significantly to the absolute magni tude of the training adaptations.
The magni tude of change also depends on the current training
status of the individual. Each biological system adaptatio n, such as
that of the cardiovascular system, has an upper limit, and as the
athlete gets closer to that upper limit, smaller and smaller gains are
observ ed. For example, in some elite competi tions (e.g., swimming),
small gains in performance may be the difference between the gold
medal and 26th place. Thus, in an event in which tenths or
hundr edths of a second make a big difference, it may be worth the
extra training time to gain that 0.05% improvement in performance.
Because of the small gains possible with training in elite athletes,
careful program design and monitoring become even more critical
(34, 83, 89, 168).
378