# Chapter 8: Sex-Related Differences and Their Implications for Resistance Training

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

**PDF Pages:** 438--464

CHAPTER  8
SEX-RELATED DIFFERENCES
AND THEIR IMPLICATIONS
FOR RESISTANCE TRAINING
N. Travis Triplett, PhD, and Nicole Dabbs, PhD
After completing this chapter, you will be able to
discuss sex -related di fferences in ph ysical char acteristics and
muscular f unction and the impl ications f or resistance tr aining in
females;
recogniz e common injuries and condi tions in f emales;
discuss r esponses and adaptations to r esistance tr aining in
females; and
understand r esistance tr aining r ecommendations f or females.
Strength and condi tioning professionals need to understand sex-
related differences in physical characteristics, body composi tion, and
physiological responses to resistance exercise when designing and
evaluating resistance training programs for females. An
understanding of these differences and the areas of concern that are
unique to female athletes can help to optimiz e performance and
decrease the risk of sport -related injuries.
438
Implications of Resistance Training for
Females
Females who regularly participate in resistance training activities can
improve their health, reduce their risk of degener ative diseases (e.g.,
osteopor osis) and their injury rates, and enhance their overall
sporting performance. Whereas in the past females may have
questioned the value of resistance training or even avoided this type
of exercise due to social stigma, evidence clearly indicates that
females are capable of tolerating and adapting to the stresses of
resistance exercise and that the benefi ts are substantial (93).
Furthermor e, to enhance health and fitness and reduce injury rates,
it is now suggested that resistance training be an essential
component of any exercise or training program that females follow
(127, 128, 167).
Physical Changes in Early Adulthood
While differences in growth and development between boys and girls
are covered in chapter 7, a few physical developme ntal changes
continue into early adulthood. On average, females matur e earlier
than males (105), and most measur es of female growth and
matur ation are complete by around age 18. Some exceptions include
the growth plates, which typical ly close by the age of 20, and peak
bone density (around age 30) (105). Howev er, neither of these are
undev eloped enough to result in a higher risk of injury from training,
including activities such as high-intensi ty or high-load plyometrics (2,
122). The brain also continues to develop throughout the 20s, but
most of this growth is in the frontal lobe, which controls decision-
making, while the motor -related brain areas are already
developmental ly complete (2). The aspects of brain functio n that can
continue to improve into the early 30s include visual-per ceptual
skills. Reactiv e agility training (see chapter 20) is a type of training
that can improve these visual-per ceptual skills (2). The additional
439
benefi ts beyond improvements in athletic performance due to
improved reaction time and cogni tive processing include a reduction
in the risk of f alls later in l ife (2).
During pubert y the production of estrogen  in girls increases fat
deposi tion and breast development, whereas testosterone
production in boys increases bone formation and protein synthesis.
Though estrogen also stimulates bone growth, boys have a longer
growth period and commence  pubert y at a later stage, and therefore
adult men tend to achiev e greater overall statur e than adult women
(2). On average, adult females tend to have more body fat, less
muscle, and lower bone miner al density than adult males.
Furthermor e, females tend to be lighter in total body weight than
males. Anthr opometric measur ements of adults indicate that males
tend to have broader should ers relative to their hips and females
tend to have broader hips relative to their waist and shoulders. The
broader shoulders in males can support more muscle tissue and can
also provide a mechanical advantage for muscles acting at the
shoulder . Although some female athletes have lower fat percentages
than untrained males, extremely low body fat percentages in
females may be associated with adverse health consequences (124,
125).
Maintaining skeletal muscle mass and bone miner al density is
important for both athletic performance and health. Without a
sustained resistance training program, muscle mass and bone
density begin a pattern of decline in the mid-30s, which can
accelerate after approximately age 50, especial ly when accompanied
by menopause (120, 152). Therefore, females should be encour aged
to participate in long-term resistance training programs to counter act
the skeletal and muscular changes that will otherwise occur with
aging. Another benefi t of maintaining or increasing muscle mass
aside from athletic performance is the extension of the time females
can engage in sport and reduce their risk of injury (154), as well as
maintaining the ability to perform activities of daily living and
independence into old age (18, 121, 182).
440
A key focus of any resis tance training program for a
female should be to maintain muscle mass and bone
mineral density, both of which are important for athletic
performance and overall health.
Pregnancy
Pregnancy  occurs only when pubertal sexual development is
complete and prior to menopause (average age between 12-51
years). There are significant and specific physiological and
anatomical changes that occur during each of the trimesters of
pregnancy and postpartum periods, which can affect physical
training and perf ormance ( table 8.1 ).
Multiple professional organizations have recommendat ions for
physical activity and exercise during pregnancy (20, 21, 26, 123,
188). All of the published guidelines promote exercise as a minimal-
risk activity that has benefi ts for most females during pregnancy ,
with some modifications to programming and specific exercises
required as pregnancy progresses due to normal anatomic and
physiologic changes that occur. These guidel ines are presented in
table 8.2 .
For pregnant females, program design variables (exercise
selection, frequency, intensi ty, and duration) should be based on the
baseline level of fitness of the athlete immediately prior to the
confirmation of pregnancy . Resistance training at a moder ate
intensi ty during pregnancy has many benefi ts including improved
blood sugar levels and improved insulin usage, as well as improved
feelings of energy and reduction of fatigue (181). Studies on elite
athletes have shown that they are able to manage a variety of
training loads and intensi ties and still deliver healthy babies and
return to their sport (168); howev er, most of the resear ch is on more
moder ate loads. Vigorous-intensi ty exercise, including high-intensi ty
interv al training, is tolerated well among females with healthy
pregnancies and who previously engaged in vigorous training, but
441
caution is elicited in exceeding 90% of maximum heart rate until
more resear ch is perf ormed (13, 169).
Pregnancy is a unique condition with specific challenges
to resistance training program design. An awareness of
the normal physiological  changes during pregnan cy is
very important to being able to design a safe, effective,
and individualized resistance training program for a
pregnant female.
TABLE 8.1  Physiological and Anatomical Changes in
Pregnancy
Trimester Cardiorespiratory Musculoskeletal Metabolic
First Increased car diac output
by 20%
Decrease in peripher al
vascular r esistance
Increase in blood v olume
Increased tidal v olume
Increase in minute
ventilation (40%-50%) and
V̇O2maxWeight gain and
increased f orces on
joints
Increase in l igament
laxity
Changes in micr o-
architectur e of bone
but not o verall bone
massIncrease in
metabol ic
rate
Increase in
body
temper ature
Second (in
addition to
prior
trimesters)Increased car diac output
by 40%
Decrease in peripher al
vascular r esistance b y
25%-30%
Increase in blood v olume,
with steady f all in
hemoglobin
Fluid r etention and edema
Supine posi tions decr ease
venous r eturn to heart,
which decr eases str oke
volume and car diac outputChanges in center of
gravity
Increase in loss of
balance
Sources: (86a, 89b , 96a, 162a, 186a, 187a)
442
Trimester Cardiorespiratory Musculoskeletal Metabolic
Third (in
addition to
prior
trimesters)Slight decr ease in car diac
output at term wi th stroke
volume decr easing and
heart r ate incr easing
Peripher al vascular
resistance begins to
increase f rom 32 weeks
Blood v olume incr eases
50% of pr epregnancy
levels wi th a 50% incr ease
in plasma v olume b y 34
weeksIncrease in lumbar
lordosis
Increase in f oot siz e
Increase in
compr ession
neuropathies
10 weeks
postpartumMost car diovascular and
respiratory changes r eturn
to prepregnancy lev els
within the first 1-2 weeks
after del iveryPelvic floor
dysfunction
Urinary incontinence
Increase in l igament
laxity (ma y persist
up to 5 months after
delivery)
Sources: (86a, 89b , 96a, 162a, 186a, 187a)
TABLE 8.2  General Exercise Recommendations and
Associated Signs and Symptoms of Exercising During
Pregnancy
TrimesterExercise recommendations and exercise-related signs and
symptoms
First Continue activi ty at pr epregnancy lev els and intensi ties but
monitor for adv erse signs and symptoms.
Misinterpr etation of maximum heart r ate, r eaching i t sooner in
pregnancy . Use combined appr oach of heart r ate and per ceived
exertion to moni tor intensi ty.
Initiate pelvic floor ex ercises to assist in labor and del ivery and
help wi th urinary incontinence.
Increase squat ting activi ties wi th body weight and loaded to
maintain str ength and impr ove labor and del ivery.
Increase w ater intak e.
Sources: (86a, 89b , 96a, 162a, 186a, 187a)
443
TrimesterExercise recommendations and exercise-related signs and
symptoms
Second (in addi tion
to prior trimesters)Avoid supine posi tions and ex ercises; swi tch to incl ine, side-
lying, or v ertical posi tions.
Continue pelvic floor ex ercises to assist in labor and del ivery and
help wi th urinary incontinence.
Third (in addi tion to
prior trimesters)Modify activi ty based on signs, symptoms, and maternal comf ort.
Continue to moni tor for adv erse signs and symptoms.
Avoid supine posi tions and ex ercises; swi tch to incl ine, side-
lying, or v ertical posi tions.
Modify activi ties to decr ease discomf ort or symptoms of
neuropath y.
10 weeks
postpartumPelvic floor ex ercises (i.e. , Kegel ex ercises) immediately after
delivery for at least 12-24 weeks.
Core stabi lization ex ercises immediately after del ivery for at least
12-24 weeks.
Gradual r eturn to ph ysical activi ty and sport -related activi ties.
Increase w ater intak e.
With Cesar ean del iveries, mor e time ma y be needed to r estore
abdominal muscles to pr epregnancy str ength and stabi lization.
Sources: (86a, 89b , 96a, 162a, 186a, 187a)
Injury and Health Considerations in
Female Athletes
Female athletes face higher risks of specific injuries and health
concerns than male athletes, possibly due to anatomical and
biomechanical differences. Strength and condi tioning professionals
should emphas ize lower extremity biomechanics and proper exercise
techniques to address injury risk. Female athletes also experience
higher rates of sport-related concussions, and mental health
concerns can be notable. Sleep depriv ation heightens their risk for
injury and impairs recovery; thus, sleep education is essential.
Additional ly, pelvic floor dysfunction, especial ly urinary incontinence,
affects female athletes at a higher rate, often affecting their activity
level and risk of injury .
444
Anterior Cruciate Ligament
It is importan t for strength and condi tioning professionals to be
aware of anterior cruciate ligament (ACL)  injuries in female
athletes, particularly in sports such as soccer, lacrosse, and
basketball (3, 4). According to a number of reports, ACL injuries
occur in greater absolute frequencies in males (122), but in
compar able sports f emale athletes’ r elative rate of ACL injuries is two
times higher than those reported for male athletes (3, 4, 78, 86,
114). Although  it is possible that the increasing absolute number of
knee injuries simply reflects an increase in participation by females
in organized sport, others have suggested causativ e factors. It is
possible that the high muscu lar resistance and knee torque during
high-load landing and rapid change-of -direction movements may
cause microdamage or strain on the ACL over time, increasing the
risk for injury for all athlete s (12, 187). Howev er, female athletes
may have other factors contributing to an increase in the rate of ACL
injury , such as anatomical, biomechanical, and external f actors.
Anatomical factors, such as femoral notch size reducing tensile
strength, greater tibial slope increasing strain, and ligament laxity
(45, 74, 98, 163), may contribute to heightened ACL injury risk in
females. Howev er, it is believed that the most significant contributing
factor is a neuromuscular deficiency , which ultimately leads to
abnormal biomechanics such as increased dynamic knee valgus upon
contact with the ground (128). Therefore, sociocul tural factors such
as motor development experience, training opportuni ties and
resour ces, gender ed development, and sex inequal ity in sporting
opportuni ties (27, 130, 142) should be examined as causal for the
higher ACL injury risk f or female athletes.
Evidence suggests that in order to reduce the risk of ACL injury ,
youth should participate in preparatory condi tioning before pubert y
to optimiz e training adaptati ons (128) and continue across the life
span. Many ACL injuries in female athletes occur from noncontact
mechanisms (e.g., deceler ation, lateral pivoting or landing) (4, 23),
which makes engaging in progressive overload training, plyometrics,
445
agility, and balance training  that is designed and delivered by a
strength and condi tioning professional critical to reducing the risk of
ACL injuries (6, 51, 79, 183). Additional clinical trials are needed to
determine the best method for reducing the incidence of ACL injuries
in female athletes and improving adher ence to these training
protocols.
Patellofemoral Pain Syndrome
Patellofemoral pain syndrome (PFPS)  is a broad term used for
pain arising from the patellofemoral joint, also known as runner ’s
knee or jumper ’s knee (24). Female athletes are more than two
times more likely to have incidences of PFPS compar ed to male
athletes (25). PFPS has been shown to be attributed to the hip
mechanics in female athletes before pubert y, and modified
mechanics in the knee may be related to PFPS throughout
development in female athletes (60). Strength and condi tioning
professionals should focus on lower extremity biomechanic s, exercise
technique, imbalances, and weaknesses with any athlete
experiencing PFPS to improve outcomes. The Nation al Athletic
Trainers’ Association has a position statement that provides guidance
to practitioners  on how to manage patellofemoral pain in athletes,
including use of br acing, taping, or other modi fications (24).
Bone Stress Injuries
Bone stress injuries , includ ing stress fractures, have regularly
been shown to occur at a higher rate in female athletes than in male
athletes (34, 153). The accumulation of repetitive stress, bone stress
injuries frequently occur in athletes (1, 153) and are consider ed
overuse injuries, where abnormal bone remodel ing occurs (180).
Strength and condi tioning professionals should continue to monitor
workload, and though it is challenging to identi fy individual bone
stress tolerance, it is possible to gener ally monitor bone health and
symptoms of relative energy deficiency in sport (RED-S)  (124).
(See chapter 11 for more information on RED-S.) Additional ly, other
446
risk factors could be identi fied through a screening process for bone
stress injuries, such as vitamin D levels and early sport special ization
(1, 180). Continuing to prescribe exercises that are osteogenical ly
stimulating and alerting workload through periodization may assist in
reducing bone str ess injuries f or female athletes.
Concussions
A concussion , or mild traumatic brain injury , is an impact to the
head or body that causes the brain to move rapidly back and forth in
the skull, which disrupts normal brain function (73). Female athletes
are at an increased incidence of sport-related concussion s in some
sports (soccer, basketball, softbal l), with hockey having the highest
incidence of concussions compar ed to male athletes in similar sports
(35, 41, 133). Female athletes have been shown to have twice the
rate of contact with equipm ent and surfaces compar ed to male
athletes. Howev er, player-to-pla yer contact has been shown to be
similar in both female and male athletes for causing concussions (32,
97). Other factors, such as biomechanical and hormonal differences,
may lead to a greater susceptibi lity of concussions in female athletes
(109, 151, 161). Female athletes experience longer recovery time
with prolonged symptoms after a concussion compar ed to male
athletes (32, 41, 109, 161). When multiple concussions occur, female
athletes experience lower cerebral blood flow (70) and greater
changes between single- and dual-task gait activities compar ed to a
single concussiv e event (81).
Concussion management, prevention, and return-to-pla y
programs should consider the sex differences in injury mechanics.
Howev er, due to a lack of female athlete–speci fic resear ch in
concussion management programs, there should be an individual ized
approach for concussion management and return to play based on
clinical presentation, regardless of sex (109, 151). The American
Medical Assoc iation for Sports Medicine position statement on
concussion in sport can guide practitioners on the clinical diagnosis,
assessment, and management in athletic populations (73).
447
How Can Female Athletes Reduce Their
Injury Risk?
To help female athletes reduce their injury risk, strength and condi tioning
professionals should do the f ollowing:
Recommend preparticipation screening by a sports medicine physician. This
should include identi fication of risk factors for injury along with
musculosk eletal testing.
Encour age female athletes to participate in a year-round condi tioning
program that includes resistance, plyometric, speed and agility, and flexibi lity
training. The condi tioning program should meet the specific needs of each
athlete and should progress in a periodiz ed fashion that allows for training
adaptations to continual ly mani fest.
Ensur e that females learn, and can repeatedly demonstr ate, correct
movement mechani cs (e.g., jumping, landing, twisting, and cutting) within a
variety of en vironments.
Precede every exercise session with a gener al dynamic warm-up and a
specific warm-up using movements that resemble those involved in the
activity and that target the activation of key muscle groups (e.g., posterior
chain muscle gr oups).
Provide augmented feedback within training sessions to optimiz e skill transfer
and enhance biomechanics r elated to injury .
Mental Health
Mental health  has gained increasingly more attention in athletes
with a focus on sport organizations and practitioners to take a
holistic approach when training athletes (33, 57, 77, 149). Athletes
are exposed to additional mental health risk factors (77, 149), and
female athletes in particular  are at higher risk for certain mental
health symptoms and prevalence compar ed to male athletes (5,
179). Resear ch suggests that female athletes may have poor mental
health outcom es due to an increased risk of certain disorders (e.g.,
burnout, eating  disorders, disordered eating, anxiet y, depression) (5,
75, 144, 149) and are subjected to increased appear ance-based
pressure (8, 144), discrimination, and financial strain than male
athletes (179).
448
Resear ch also suggests that elite female athletes are twice as
likely to self-report symptoms  of depression than male athletes (63),
which may inhibi t health and performance. In 2021, 40% of
collegiate female athletes reported experiencing overwhelming
anxiet y compar ed to 22% in col legiate male athletes (189).
Early detection of mental health issues is critical, and
strength and conditioning practitioners should
understand symptoms and how these issues arise and
should promo te and provide environments that support
an athlete’s mental health, prevention, and treatment
team and strategies of mental health disorders.
Sleep
A majori ty of athletes receive less-than- age-appropriate sleep levels,
and a loss in sleep for athletes is a known risk factor for increased
injury risk (15, 16, 157). Female collegiate athletes may be
particularly likely to have low sleep durations that are consistent with
sleep depriv ation (<7 h/night), in association with daytime
sleepiness and dysfunction (30, 69). Sleep quanti ty (113, 116) and
quality have been shown to be lower after training and competi tion
in female athletes (134, 136). Education on sleep hygiene for
athletes, coaches, and support practitioners has been shown to
address some barriers preventing good sleep quality and thus has
been shown to improve sleep in athletes (115, 135). Improving sleep
quality and quanti ty is cri tical f or optimal r ecovery (178).
Pelvic Floor Dysfunction
Pelvic floor dysfunction (PFD) is a term used to identi fy various
impairments of the pelvic floor muscles that support  the pelvic
organs and promote continence (99, 107). The most common PFDs
are urinary incontinence (UI) and stress urinary incontinence
(SUI)  among several others (7, 42, 107). UI is an involuntary loss of
urine, and SUI is an involuntary loss of urine with any physical
449
exertion (22, 150). It has been reported that UI in female athletes
occurs 5 times more compar ed to male athletes, and 2.7 times more
compar ed to sedentary females (42, 150, 164, 172). Female athletes
have an overall 27% prevalence of UI compar ed to male athletes,
and a 36% prevalence of UI compar ed to sedentary females (42,
150, 164, 172). Participating in sport has been reported to be one of
the main causes of UI in female athletes, with high-impac t and high-
loading sports incr easing incidence of SUI.
UI may be due to the imbalance of contraction strength  and an
increase in abdominal pressure that results in deformat ion of the
connectiv e tissue (99, 107). Programs should include prevention,
lifestyle modifications, pelvic  floor strengthening, biofeedback, and
pharmacological interv ention s. Female athletes should be taught
how to properly engage their pelvic floor muscles and abdominal
wall muscles, and in some cases may need to see a physical
therapist that special izes in PFD. With proper education and pelvic
floor tr eatment, f emales can r ecover from UI (46, 55).
How Can Females Improve Their Health
Outcomes?
To help females improve their health outcomes, strength and condi tioning
professionals should do the f ollowing:
Recommend workin g with appropriate medical staff to provide resour ces and
services as needed when they have identi fied signs and symptoms of
concerns that incr ease risk of heal th issues
Encour age females to seek services from a mental health provider when
initial symptoms of mental heal th disor ders arise
Educate females on the appropriate amount and quality of sleep needed and
the important role it plays in the body’s recovery and for decreasing risk of
injury
Provide information to females about the variety of impairments that can
occur in the pelvic floor and encour age females to seek a special ized physical
therapist in PFD when signs and symptoms oc cur
450
Training Responses and Adaptations
Before resista nce training programs can be properly designed,
understanding the physiological responses to a resistan ce training
session and adaptations to regularly performing a resistance training
program are critical. The main body systems involved are the
musculosk eletal, metabol ic, and endocrine systems, which have
varying levels of response and adaptation differences between males
and females. These differences can affect how programming
priorities are set, which is important for obtaining the optimum
training r esults.
Musculoskelet al
Resistance training offers a multitude of benefi ts for females,
including the attenuation of age-related declines in bone miner al
density (89). Specifically, the stress from the mechanical loading
applied via resistance training directly increases the magni tude of
skeletal remodel ing and therefore bone mass. Resistance training
can increase bone miner al density in various skeletal regions of the
body (89). It is also known  that higher intensi ties of resistance
training promote greater degrees of osteogenesis  (103) and that
preadolescence is an opportune time to participate in weight -bearing
and other loaded activities in order to enhance bone miner al density
(65, 80).
Through participation in a resistance training program, females
can also experience muscle hypertr ophy. When sophisticated
techniques (e.g., computed tomogr aphy) are used to accurately
measur e changes in muscle cross-sectional area, relative short-term
(up to 16 weeks) gains in muscle hypertr ophy are similar between
sexes (43, 67). When the muscular development of female
weightl ifters, bodybui lders, and track and field athletes who have
not used anabol ic steroids is examined, it is obvious that muscle
hypertr ophy is possible in females who regularly participa te in high-
volume or high-intensi ty training programs, even though these gains
451
may be less than in males. A genetic disposi tion to develop a large
muscle mass ma y also be a contributing f actor (166).
Metabolic
The metabol ic system is a key system in physical activity, and
understanding its function is necessary to understanding the acute
responses and training adaptations of the other body systems. While
the metabol ic system operates similarly in males and females, some
differences exist that relate to the amount and type of muscle mass,
which can affect the magni tude of training-r elated adaptations.
Howev er, there is a lack of research comparing males and females of
similar training  backgr ounds, as well as in high-lev el athletes, which
limits the understanding of the metabol ic system and how it adapts
in female athletes.
Anaerobic Energy
The biochemical pathways that provide short-term energy include
ATP-PCr and glycolysis. While all muscle fibers can produce energy
with all types of biochemical pathways, the faster muscle fibers that
have a greater capaci ty for force production have a greater amount
of the substr ates (phosphocr eatine, glycogen) and enzym es needed
for the nonoxidativ e biochemical pathways (see chapter 3). On
average, males have a slightly higher proportion of these faster
(type II) muscle fiber types (84, 165). While both males and females
have the capaci ty to under go muscle hypertr ophy with various types
of anaer obic training, as previously indicated, the level of absolute
hypertr ophy attained by males will exceed that of females, resulting
in greater storage potential for phosphocr eatine and glycogen,
creatine kinase, and glycolytic enzymes, as well as greater overall
glycolytic capaci ty (54, 155).
Aerobic Energy
The biochemical pathways that provide energy for long-dur ation
activities involve the oxidativ e energy systems (i.e., Kreb’s cycle,
452
electr on transport chain, and lipid oxidation), which continuously
supply energy at rest and for lower intensi ty activities (62). The
oxidativ e pathways depend on the cardiorespiratory system’ s ability
to supply oxygen and remove metabol ic wastes, and resear ch
reviews have presented differences in males and females under
various condi tions (9, 29, 96, 186). Female endur ance athletes have
been shown to be more fatigue resistant during prolonged events,
despite having overall lower aerobic capaci ty (V̇O2max) relative to
body size and slower performance times than males (17, 48). This is
thought to be due to muscle fiber type distribution (165), with
females having a greater proportion of type I oxidativ e fibers on
average. Females therefore oxidize a greater amount of fat and a
lesser amount of carboh ydrate and protein (40, 170). This finding is
supported by Cardinale (2018), who determined that females have
close to 33% greater mitochondrial respiration than males. These
differences may present an advantage to female athletes in most
types of endur ance activi ties, including ul traendur ance ev ents (174).
Training adaptations in the aerobic energy pathways differ in
magni tude between males and females with regard to the
cardiovascular system in particular (145), which affects oxygen
delivery to the muscle tissue and subsequent oxidativ e energy
production. In females, more modest increases in blood volume and
similar or lesser increases in heart dimensions such as left
ventricular chamber size and wall thickness result from aerobic
endur ance training (11, 44) when compar ed to males. Howev er,
female athletes have similar adaptations compar ed to males with
regard to left ventricle function, including a greater ejecti on fraction
(159). Females  also present more efficient oxygen cost of running
than males at various running intensi ties (76) while maintaining their
running econom y across a range of velocities. All of these factors
affect overall aerobic performance, with females compe nsating for
smaller hearts  and less oxygen-carrying capaci ty by different
mechanisms than males.
453
Endocrine
The endocrine system  is responsible for regulating physiological
responses and adaptations to the various stressors encounter ed,
including physical activity. In response to strength training and
condi tioning, the endocrine system regulates muscular repair and
growth (58, 95) as the various anabol ic and catabol ic mechanisms
trigger ed by the endocrine system affect the ability of skeletal
muscle to gener ate force and to adapt to training (95). The
immediate, or acute, endocrine response to a training session
traditional ly has been thought to be a greater catalyst for muscle
tissue growth and remodel ing than the chronic changes in resting
hormonal concentr ations (94).
While a large number of hormones perform a myriad of functions
within the human body, a much smaller number affect muscle
responses to training, and even fewer have been the focus of
resear ch in athletic females. The primary hormones to have known
influence on muscle and strength development, which have been
studied in females, include testoster one, the growth hormone family,
insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1), and cortisol . It is also
important to understand gener al function of the hormones involved
in the menstrual cycle , because they can influence training and
performance in female athletes and are found in much higher
concentr ations than in males.
Testosterone
Testoster one is present in much higher concentr ations in males than
in females, but females produce testoster one in small quanti ties in
the ovaries and the adrenal gland (52). Howev er, resting
testoster one concentr ations are highly variable among  females,
which can account for the variability in responsiv eness to resistance
training of absolute hypertr ophy and strength (67), although relative
levels of hypertrophy and strength are similar between the sexes.
Despi te low testoster one concentr ations, females experience
stimulation of muscle protein synthesis (185). With an acute bout of
454
resistance exercise, females do not exhibi t significant elevations in
testoster one concentr ations (95, 177). Howev er, with prolonged
training, some acute elevations in testoster one have been observ ed
in females (137). These increases are likely due to a combination of
factors including a decreased rate of degradation, evidenced by
lower measur es of metabol ites of testoster one breakdown (49).
Therefore, in females, testoster one likely still has an important role
in the development of absolute muscular size, strength, and power
with resistance training and may also be an important indicator of
the tr ainabi lity of an individual (67 , 68).
Growth Hormones and Growth Factors
Growth hormones (GH)  have a primary role in muscle tissue
remodel ing and repair but do not function alone, because muscle
protein synthesis is trigger ed with the growth factor  known as
IGF-1. In females, it has been demonstr ated that resting
concentr ations of GH are higher than in males (92) and with chronic
training, GH levels at rest are lower in females compar ed to males
(171), which could indicate a greater sensitivity to the hormone, but
resear ch is lacking.
After chronic resistance training, circulating GH rises similarly in
females and males. Following an acute resistance exercise bout in
females, circulating GH concentr ations increase two- to fourfold (66,
83). The magni tude of the circulating GH increase depends on the
type of exercise stimulus as well as the amount of total work
performed. For example, exercise sessions consisting of high total
work (10RM load) and shorter rest interv als (1 minute) (92), large
muscle groups (95), multi-set protocols (126), and exercises that
induce elevations in blood lactate and reductions in blood glucose
(91, 95) result in significant elevations in GH. With training, the
magni tude of the ex ercise-induced rise in GH incr eases (171).
455
Cortisol
Cortisol is an important hormone that helps regulate blood glucose
levels as well as inflammation. Cortisol rises in anticipation of
exercise and sport competi tion in order to prepare the body for the
upcoming psychological and metabol ic demands (118, 140). This
anticipatory rise has been shown to be greater in trained females
than in sedentary females (47). The cortisol response  to acute
exercise is greatest in resistance exercise protocols that result in
higher levels of GH (91) and blood lactate (90). Several
investigations have demonstr ated that in comparison to males, the
cortisol response to acute exercise is attenuated in females (58, 66,
140). This is thought to be due to higher cortisol sensitivity in
females (156) or the impact of female sex hormones on modulating
activity of the sympathetic nervous system, adrenal glands, and
hypothalamus-pi tuitary axis (175).
Training influences the magni tude of the cortisol response in
females. Elite female athlete s do not exhibi t an anticipat ory rise in
cortisol before exercise (47) but do exhibi t higher cortisol secretion
and different patterns of secretion (158). In addition, female sex
hormones (estradiol  and progesterone ) may lower cortisol
responsivi ty, thereby potential ly altering the effects of cortisol over
the menstrual cycle (104). Immune factors modulate glucocorticoid
sensitivity (59), accounting for differences observ ed in female
athletes.
The Menstrual Cycle
Females experience the menstrual cycle during adolescence and
adulthood, approximately between the ages of 12 and 50 (56).
While the cycle is usually discussed in terms of reproductiv e
function, the menstrual cycle hormones also influence other body
functions that are related to exercise and training (37). There are
also times during the menst rual cycle when the body experiences
symptoms such as cramping, nausea, and headaches, which may
negativ ely affect the ability to engage in exercise sessions or a
456
training program. Therefore, it is important that practitioners have a
gener al understanding of the menstrual cycle and its physical
effects.
In brief, two primary hormones are released from the ovaries
during the menstrual cycle, estradiol and progester one. During the
initial half of the cycle, mens trual bleeding occurs and then estradiol
peaks and drops. Progester one rises and peaks during the second
half of the cycle, and there is a second but lesser peak of estradiol.
By the end of the cycle, both estradiol and progester one drop to
their lowest lev els (figure 8.1).
Estradiol
In menstruating adult females, the primary form of estrogen is
estradiol, which has been shown to directly affect the structure and
function of muscle, tendon, and ligaments, as well as contribute to
muscle mass and strength (37). Estradiol appears to have a more
protectiv e effect on skeletal muscle (100) by attenuating the amount
of damage. To do this, estradiol may decrease postex ercise
membr ane disruption, act as an antioxidant, act as a membr ane
stabilizer, and mediate inflammatory cell infiltration (53, 141). In
addition, estradiol may influence contractile properties of skeletal
muscle and muscle protein turno ver (71). This supports muscle mass
development by promoting protein synthesis over degradation and
enhancing sensitivity of the response to resistance training (71, 72).
High levels of estradiol are not always beneficial because decreases
in power and performance can result, which can increase the risk for
catastr ophic ligament injuries (37). Low levels of estradiol are
equal ly problematic, resulting in increased muscle cell death and
reduced sk eletal muscle mass and str ength (39, 87).
457
FIGURE 8.1 Phases of the menstrual cycle and the concomi tant changes in estrogen and
progester one.
Reprinted by permission from W.L. Kenney, J.H. Wilmore, and D.L. Costill, “Sex Differences in Sport and Exercise,” in
Physiology of Sport and Exercise, 9th ed. (Human Kinetics, 2024).
After an acute bout of resistance exercise, increased estradiol
concentr ations have been reported (94, 158). This response may
occur due to increased activity of the enzyme that converts
testoster one to estrogen (estradiol) (129), which may also contribute
to increases in circulating testoster one (101). Because of the
beneficial effects of estrogen on muscle, it is important for females
to maintain normal menstru al cycle function in order to maximiz e
their adaptatio ns to training (37) and reduce the risks associated
with low estr adiol lev els (173).
458
Resistance Training Considerations
With resistance  training, the primary goal is to improve strength and
power . When comparing training-induced changes in muscular
strength between sexes, it is important to distinguish between
absolute and relative measur es. Sex-related differences in
hypertr ophy and muscle mass (106, 132, 143) indicate that absolute
muscle strength in females is lower than in males (108, 117),
whereas males’ greater absolute strength is primari ly achiev ed by
larger muscle fiber size (117, 146, 160). The absolute lower body
strength of females is gener ally closer to male values compar ed to
the absolute values for upper body strength (10, 82, 84, 117). Sex-
related differences in body composi tion, anthropometric
characteristics, and distribution of fat-free mass can partly explain
these sex-related differences, which are appar ent in recreational ly
trained individuals as wel l as highly tr ained athletes (14).
When consider ed on a relative basis, sex-related differences in
muscular strength are greatly reduced. Females have similar number
of muscle fibers as males, and strength is similar when normal ized to
muscle volume (113, 117). Differences in hypertr ophy between
males and females may be due to a variety of factors such as
endocrine and genetics because they relate to regulating muscle
mass (184), whereas factors such as muscle cross-sectiona l area and
enzyme activity may contribute to strength and performance
differences (85, 131, 162). Because the average male and female
differ consider ably in body size, it is useful to compar e sex
differences in strength relative to body weight, fat-free mass, and
muscle cross-sectional area (14, 31). When expressed relative to
body weight, the lower body strength of females is similar to that of
males, while the upper body strength of females is still somewhat
less (10, 82, 84, 117). If comparisons are made relative to fat-free
mass, differences in strength  between males and females tend to
disappear (10, 82, 84 , 117).
459
Sex-related differences in power output are similar to those for
muscular strength. Measur ements comparing power outputs of
female athletes relative to lean body mass were reported to be
similar for lower body power and still presented differences for upper
body power when compar ed to male athletes (10, 61). Although the
data are equiv ocal, sex-related differences in the rate of force
development (147, 148) and the recruitment differences in muscle
activation where females express lower levels of type IIa fibers’
percent of myosin heavy chain isoform content (138, 139) could
partly explain these findings.
During progressive overload and targeted training, female athletes
experience substantial power and strength increases similar to male
athletes (64). In a recent study, maximal strength and vertical jump
height were increased in collegiate volleybal l players by using a
combination of traditional resistance training exercises and
weightl ifting variations at various loads in addition to volleybal l
practice, over the course of about 2.5 years of training (88). Other
resear ch supports plyometrics in female basketball players and other
velocity-based resistance training in cyclists to improve strength,
power , and muscle hypertr ophy (36, 119). It has also been reported
that adding heavy strength training to a female athlete’ s endur ance
training increased muscle strength, performance, and size without
affecting endur ance running perf ormance or running econom y (176).
Several studies have investigated menstrual cycle phase and
exercise performance, with some effects indicating that the phase of
cycle has an effect on performance in eumenorrheic females (111).
Additional research shows that in naturally cycling females, there are
minimal differences in strength measur es between phases (19). The
practical relevance of phase-based training comes into question of
whether it is feasible to track female athletes’ cycles when
considering the variety of hormonal contraceptiv es they may be
using or menstrual cycle irregulari ties, especial ly in team-based
sports in which the number of athletes is high.
460
The most recent evidence on menstrual cycle and performance
from meta-analyses did not conclude any systematic relationship
between performance and menstrual cycle phase in trained female
athletes (38, 50, 111, 112). Other consider ations are necessary to
consider , such as varying menstrual cycle symptoms among female
athletes and the effect on their sleep and recovery during all stages
of the menstrual cycle (110). Consequently , the current evidence
does not support modifying prescription of resistance training based
on a f emale athlete’ s menstrual cy cle phase.
461
Conclusion
Evidence indicates that resistance exercise can be a safe and
effective method of training  for female athletes of all ages and
abilities. The potential benef its are multifactorial, includi ng positive
effects on a variety of physical performance variables (e.g., strength
and power), health markers (e.g., body composi tion and cardiac
function), and psychosocial development (e.g., self-image and
confidence). Moreover, regular participation in resistance training
programs can better prepare female athletes to increase
performance and decrease risk of injury . Though the fundamental
principles of resistance training are similar for people of both sexes,
there are unique conside rations specific to female  athletes.
Knowledge of sex-related differences is essential to the development
and evaluation of safe and effective resistance training programs.
Strength and condi tioning professionals should be aware that
individual responses to resistance exercise may vary greatly
independent of sex and should be sensitive to the individual needs
of all participants.
Over the past few decades, coaches, clinicians, and exercise
scientists have added to our understanding of sex-related differences
and their implications for resistance exercise. Their work has
quanti fied the impact of resistance training on female athletes and
has provided the foundation for recommendations about the design
of strength and condi tioning programs. The information in this
chapter and other chapters should help strength and condi tioning
professionals understand and appreciate sex-related differences and
enhance their ability to develop safe and effective resistance training
programs f or females.
KEY TERMS
anterior cruciate l igament (ACL)
bone str ess injuries
462
concussion
cortisol
endocrine system
estradiol
estrogen
growth f actor
growth hormones (GH)
menstrual cy cle
mental heal th
osteogenesis
patellofemoral pain syndr ome (PFPS)
pelvic floor dysf unction (PFD)
pregnancy
progester one
relative ener gy deficiency in sport (RED- S)
stress urinary incontinence (SUI)
testoster one
urinary incontinence (UI)
STUDY QUESTIONS
  1.  Which of the following is not one of the physical changes
related to growth and development that occur well into
adulthood and may affect resistance training and condi tioning
in females?
  a.  incr eased bone miner al densi ty
  b.  closur e of gr owth plates
  c.  impr oved visual-per ceptual ski lls
  d.  incr eased muscle mass
  2.  Which of the following musculosk eletal changes occurs with
pregnancy and can af fect resistance tr aining pr ogramming?
  a.  incr eased body temper ature
  b.  decr eased car diac output
  c.  incr eased l igament laxi ty
463
  d.  decr eased v enous r eturn in supine posi tions
  3.  Estr adiol, one of the main hormones in the menstrual cycle,
has which of the f ollowing ef fects in the body?
  a.  pr omotes muscle pr otein synthesis and r educes muscle
protein degr adation
  b.  incr eases the amount of muscle damage wi th training
  c.  negativ ely influences the contr actile properties of muscle
  d.  incr eases postex ercise muscle cel l membr ane disruption
  4.  When a female athlete has multiple concussions, which of the
following does she not experience?
  a.  lower cer ebral blood flow
  b.  fewer changes between single-task gai t activi ties
  c.  gr eater changes between single-task gai t activi ties
  d.  gr eater changes between dual-task gai t activi ties
  5.  When creating a program for a female athlete, which of the
following is the most important to consider?
  a.  individual ization
  b.  sex di fferences
  c.  sport di fferences
  d.  gener alization b y sport
464