# Section 9.3

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 9: Psychological Foundations of Performance

**Section:** 9.3 -- Energy Management: Arousal and Anxiety

**PDF Pages:** 486--500

task-relevant focus facilitates reaction time and decision making.
With reinforcement, athlete s also build long-term memories of
success, self-esteem, self-efficacy , and confidence. Successful
experiences more likely color the athlete’ s view of competition as
desirable and as an opportun ity to perform. Of course, coaches may
punish unwarranted lack of effort, but it seems ineffective to punish
athletes for mistak es if they are making the effort to perform
correctly.
How Should Positive and Negative
Reinforcement Be Applied?
Coaches should gener ally subscribe to a reinforcement strategy to assist
athletes to f ocus on what they do corr ectly.
Punishment should be used sparingly , because it increases the likelihood that
athletes wi ll focus on what they ar e doing incorr ectly.
Under conditions that promote a narrow focus of attention, positive
reinforcement aids a focus on task-relevant cues, while punishment floods
attentional capaci ty with a pr edominance of task -irrelevant cues.
486
Attention and Focus
The athlete’ s ability to focus can be better understood through the
construct of attention. Attention  is defined as the processin g of
both external and internal cues that come to awareness. A
performer ’s conscious attention is continuously bombar ded with a
variety of external stimul i and internal thoughts to which it can be
directed. The ability to inhibi t awareness of some stimul i in order to
process others is termed selective attention , and it suppr esses
task-irrelevant cues (e.g., people on the sidelines, planes flying over
the stadium) in order to process the task-relevant cues in the limited
attentional space. For a basebal l pitcher, task-relevant cues might
include the hi tter’s tendencies and the locations of runners on base.
Selective attention, commonly referred to by athletes as
their  level of focus , is the suppression of task-irrelevant
stimuli and thoughts.
American footbal l coaches often exploi t the strategic potential of
selectiv e attention of their opponents by calling a time-out just
before a field goal attempt. During the time-out, the opposing
athlete might selectiv ely attend more to task-irrelevant thoughts of
self-doubt and the potentia l for failure, rather than the more
beneficial thoughts of self-reassur ance or a focus on minor
instructional cues. Placekick ers can deal with this anxiet y and
attentional challenge by adopting a ritual or a mental checkl ist,
commonly referred to as a routine , that consciously directs
thoughts to task-relevant and controllable concerns (e.g., breathing,
checking the turf , and str etching the hamstrings).
The important underlying principle is that thinking one set of
thoughts actively precludes attending to other worrisom e thoughts
because of the limited capaci ty of working memory . This human
shortcoming can be used to advantage. Before a lifting performance,
for example, the athlete might use key phrases to focus on the task-
487
relevant cues associated with the lift, such as foot placement, back
position, point of visual focus, and knee angle during a squat. This
strategy can reduce distractions, which often deter optimal effort.
Such focusing strategies can promote mental consistency during the
preparatory state, which in turn can promote physical consistency —
the hal lmark of a ski lled athlete.
It is also important to note that the ability to focus attention on
task-relevant cues and to control distraction is a skill that can be
learned and that improves with increased experience. According to
Fitts and Posner’s (17) classic theory , the athlete progresses through
three stages when learning new motor skills. The first stage, termed
the cogni tive stage , is characteriz ed by effortful and conscious
regulation of the movement. That is, the athlete has to think about
the details of the task. During the second stage, the associativ e
stage , the athlete must focus on the task but is less concerned  with
the details of the movement. Finally, the athlete achiev es the stage
of automatici ty, during which the mind is relaxed and the skill is
executed automatical ly without thinking. Assuming proper instruction
and coaching, the relaxed mind focuses only on what is relevant to
the task at that moment and, at the same time, automati cally filters
out all irrelevant cues. Attaining automatici ty of action and the clarity
of thought that often ac companies i t is a goal f or man y athletes.
Attentional Styles
Nideffer (41) formulated an important concept in sport psychology
when he theoriz ed that individuals tend to experience shifting
categories of attentional styles during performance. These  categories
are characteriz ed by two dimensions: direction (internal–external)
and width (broad–narr ow). The first dimension refers to an
introspectiv e versus an externally oriented perspectiv e, whereas the
second dimension refers to an integr ative (expansiv e) versus a
highly selectiv e orientation. These dimensions each occur on
overlapping continuums, creating four quadr ants of attentional
focus: broad external, in which the athlete assesses the situation by
488
looking at the environment and various elements within it; broad
internal, in which the athlete  processes information and develops a
strategy; narrow internal, in which the athlete mental ly rehearses
the upcoming action; and narrow external, in which the athlete
specifically focuses on one or two external cues to gener ate action.
These constructs and their relationships to each other can be seen in
figure 9.3.
FIGURE 9.3  Four quadr ants of at tentional f ocus.
Adapted from Nideffer (1976).
Understanding attentional styles can improve coaching
effectiveness. For example, an athlete who tends to become
overloaded with external stimuli might be coached to focus on one
important cue, such as an opponent ’s footwork. Athletes who seem
to get lost in their own head could practice describing out loud, to a
coach, what they are feeling during a lunge. Without such coaching,
these players would likely attend to inappr opriate cues and react too
slowly .
489
Psychological Techniques for Improved
Performance
Improving one’s use of mental skills can enhance performance on
sporting courts, in training rooms, and on practice fields; it can also
transfer to better performance in all areas of life. These
psychological skills are quite similar to physical, technical, and
tactical skills in that they can be taught and learned and must be
practiced on a regular basis if they are to gener ate long-term
behavioral change. This next section introduces several of these
psychological skills that can be integr ated into training to improve
overall performance.
Relaxation Techniques to Control Elevated
Arousal and Anxiety
Several techniques can be used to help athletes manage their
psychological processes through relaxation. Relaxation techniques
are designed to reduce physiological arousal and increase task-
relevant focus. These techniques are important when people are
executing complex tasks or practicing new ones, when they are
dealing with pressure situations, or when deliberate focus is
necessary .
Diaphragmatic Breathing
One simple technique for reaching a higher level of physical and
mental relaxation is diaphragmatic breathing  (63). Referred to as
belly breathing , this form of breathing is a basic stress management
technique and a precursor to virtual ly all other mental training
techniques. It focuses attention on the process of breathing to clear
the mind and therefore increase concentr ation. During any mental
training exercise, athletes should attempt to engage in deep,
rhythmic breathing in a relaxed, natural manner . Physiological ly, this
form of breathing has a major influence on decreasing heart rate
490
and muscle tension due to feedback mechanisms that link the
respiratory and cardiac control centers in the brain stem. The
relatively deep inspir ation, followed by a controlled expiration, alters
autonomic nervous system (ANS) balance to emphasiz e
parasympathetic neural activity and vagal tone (44). The
parasympathetic branch of the ANS promotes the opposi te effect of
the sympathet ic-mediated fight-or-flight response. Thus, rhythmic
breathing can decrease neural stimulation of both the skeletal
muscles and organs (e.g., heart, lungs, liver), resulting in a sense of
deep r elaxation.
Diaphr agmatic breathing requires that attention be directed to the
abdominal region. It is best to get familiar with this starting from a
standing position so that breathing is not inhibi ted. The athlete
should let the arms hang loosely and concentr ate on relaxing,
particularly in the neck and shoulder region, by first taking a couple
of deep breaths. Next, the athlete should relax the abdominal
muscles so that they appear flaccid. The initiation of each breath
should occur simultaneously with the relaxed protrusion of the
abdomen; placing a hand on the abdomen gives feedback to ensur e
that the abdomen protrudes with the initiation of each breath. With
each breath the abdomen should become naturally distended. When
this portion of the technique is performed properly , the diaphr agm (a
muscle at the base of the lungs) contracts and drops, allowing a
deeper breath to occur. This is the first stage of taking a maximal
inhalation. The entire process of inhalation takes place in three
different areas and stages: the lower abdomen, the mid-chest, and
finally the upper chest. Diaphr agmatic breathing can be combined
with more dynamic muscular relaxation techniques like progressive
muscular r elaxation and autogenic tr aining.
Progressive Muscular Relaxation
To achieve an appropriate level of cogni tive and somatic activation
before performance, athletes may emplo y progressive muscle
relaxation (PMR) (28). Progressive muscle relaxation  is a
491
technique by which psychological and physical arousal are self-
regulated through the control of skeletal muscle tension. In essence,
by going through a series of alternating muscular tensing and
relaxing phases, the athlete learns to become aware of somatic
tension and thereby control it. The hope is that a relaxed body will
promote a r elaxed mind.
These tensing and relaxing cycles progress from one muscle
group to the next until all muscle groups are optimal ly relaxed. Each
cycle involves maximal ly tensing each muscle for a short period of
time (10-15 s), followed by a conscious attempt to relax that muscle
completely , before moving on to the next muscle group. With
practice, an athlete learns to rapidly discern the difference between
a tense muscle and a relaxed one and then actively take steps to
gener ate the needed muscular r elaxation.
In many cases, a positive side effect of the reduced muscle
tension is an increase in smooth, fluid, or efficient movement as well
as an increased range of motion around the joint. This can be an
effective self-regulation techn ique for some athletes before practice
or competition, or even during an intense moment in a given
contest. Therefore, athletes should practice this technique in the
days leading up to competi tion (rather than on the day of) to
determine i ts individual impact.
Autogenic Training
For athletes who are injured or who for some reason find it
uncomf ortable or impractical to experience high muscu lar tension
levels, the PMR cycle for each muscle group can be replaced with an
attentional state that simply focuses on the sense of warmth and
heaviness for a particular limb or muscle group. This technique,
referred to as autogenic training , consists of a series of exercises
designed to produce physical sensations in the body—gener ally
warmth and heaviness (64). Because autogenic training  eliminates
the need for uncomf ortable levels of muscle tension in the
contraction–r elaxation cycles, older athletes or athletes in
492
rehabi litation from injury may find this an attractive alternativ e to
PMR.
Relaxation techniques are designed to reduce
physiological arousal and increase task-relevant focus.
These techniques are of extreme importance when one
is executing complex or novel tasks or performing in
high-pressure situations.
Systematic Desensitization
Sometimes fears are learned by association of previously neutral
stimul i with a stressful event. For example, an adult non-swimmer
who experienced a threatening event in the water as a child may
avoid activities around water because of a learned association. This
individual may become fearful and therefore tense doing basic
resistance or stretching exercises in a pool, even ones that require
no swimming skill. This example illustrates the importance of
understanding exercise science. For example, the aquatic
environment is a great aid in enhancing flexibi lity. To benefi t
maximal ly from a stretching program, howev er, a participant must
learn to fully relax. If the purpose of the pool session is to enhance
flexibi lity, the inability of a non-swimmer to relax in the environment
could easi ly prevent gains in flexibi lity.
One technique that helps an athlete initially confront or reduce
fear is systematic desensitizatio n (SD) (71). Systematic
desensi tization combines mental and physical techniques  that allow
an athlete to replace a fear response to various cues with a
relaxation response. Like cognitive–affective stress management
training (SMT) and stress inoculation training (SIT), systematic
desensi tization teaches the athlete to use a specific relaxation skill-
based coping response to control for cogni tive arousal (64). This
adaptiv e, learned replacement process, the principle behind SD, is
called counterconditioning .
493
To practice the technique, an athlete should be reasonably skilled
at both PMR and mental imagery . The athlete should construct a
hierarchy, or progression, of events and situations that he or she
specifically perceives as fearful. For example, a competi tive gymnast
who suffered a serious injury on the balance beam may list a series
of fearful scenes, proceeding from warming up before the event to
the actual mo vement that pr ecipitated the injury .
In a relaxed setting the athlete visual izes the first scene and
experiences a mild degree of anxiet y. At the same time,
diaphr agmatic breathing, PMR, or another physical relaxation
technique is instituted, and a strong relaxation response theoretically
should overcome the relatively weak fight-or-flight  syndr ome. This
technique is practiced until the athlete can hold the image clearly
while maintaining a relaxed state. The athlete progresses through
the hierarchy, experiencing condi tioned fear in small, manageable
doses that are overcome by the relaxation achiev ed with the
relaxation technique. This procedur e prevents cogni tive avoidance
and counter condi tions a new response (i.e., relaxation) to the
formerly f ear-inducing stimul i (64).
How Should Athletes Use Arousal Control
Techniques?
An athlete  should emplo y arousal reduction techniques when performing a
new skill or one that is complex or when performing in high-pr essure
situations.
Athletes should emplo y arousal enhancement techniques when executing
simple ski lls, ones that ar e well learned, or in si tuations of minimal pr essure.
The purpose of employing such techniques is to allow the athlete to perform
with an unbur dened mind while matching his or her mental and physical
intensi ty to the demands of the task.
Imagery
Imagery  is a cogni tive skill in which the athlete creates or re-
creates an experience in his or her mind (64). Ideally, for athletes, it
494
uses all the senses to create a mental experience of an athletic
performance. The athlete simulates reality by mental ly rehearsing a
movement, imagining visual, auditory, kinesthetic, olfactory , and
even gustatory (taste) cues. Feltz and Landers (16) provided
convincing evidence for the effectiveness of mental imagery in the
enhancement of sport skill based on a meta- analytic review of the
literature. During the initial stages of using imagery , the athlete may
start with a relatively simple, somewhat familiar visual image. This
helps successful practice of the technique. As with learning any skill
by proceeding from simple to complex, the person starts with static
images, such as visual izing a golf ball or mental ly examining the
visual characteristics of a tennis racket. The vividness or detail of the
image should become clearer and clearer with continued practice.
Some people have a natural talent for achieving image clarity, but
everyone can impr ove with repeated pr actice.
The perspectiv e of the image can be internal (first person) or
external (third person). Although the resear ch literature is unclear as
to whether one is superior , it seems that an image that is more
engaging and natural to the athlete would be most appropriate. Of
course, the internal, first-person perspectiv e seems more specific to
skill execution, inasmuch as the actual task is performed with such
an orientation. Howev er, because many athletes are familiar with
reviewing film or recordings of their performances, an external
perspectiv e may also f eel natur al.
After the athlete successfully visual izes a stationary object with
vivid detail, he or she may start to move the object or begin to walk
around it in the mind, viewing it from a number of different
perspectiv es. For an image such as a basketball, the athlete may
attempt to bounce the ball and feel it against the fingertips. In this
manner , the athlete increases complexi ty by controlling the image or
moving it with control (e.g., bouncing the ball) and by bringing a
multisensory perspectiv e to bear (i.e., using tactile or kinesthetic as
well as visual sensation).
495
Rehearsing successful execution of a skill during imagined
competi tive condi tions can provide the subconscious mind with
positive memories, thus increasing the athlete’ s sense of confidence
and preparedness for the particular sport. Of course, mental imaging
is not as powe rful a determinant of self-efficacy as actual success,
but it does offer two potential ly potent ingredients. First, successful
performance is entirely under the control of the athlete during
imaging, whereas a degree of uncertaint y about the outcome is
inherent in reality. In imagery the athlete has a great opportuni ty to
experience success. We believe that athletes should be realistic in
the kinds of success they imagine; that is, the mental images should
be personal ly challenging yet within the realm of possibi lity. Second,
the athlete can experience competi tion repeatedly , fostering a sense
of familiarity and pr eparedness.
For some athletes, the month s of preparation for a season of play
—involving off-season, preseason, and in-season condi tioning and
skill development —may lead to only a few minutes of actual
competi tive experience. Even for the starters in team sports, actual
competi tive experience may be extremely small relative to physical
practice time. Mental image ry, however, allows the athlete  to get
used to this uncertain environment over longer periods of time
despite minimal r eal-world competi tive opportuni ty.
Self-Efficacy
Of course, one of the main objectiv es for applied sport psychology is
gener ating a psychological perspectiv e that improves performance,
and it has been argued that perceived self-confidenc e, or self-
efficacy (1), is a better predictor of task execution than either
arousal or anxiet y. Self-confidence  is the belief that one can
successfully perform a desired behavior (64), while self-efficacy , a
situational ly specific form of self-confidence, is the perception of
one’s ability to perform a given task in a specific situation (4).
Someone who is highly self-efficacious does not doubt his or her
ability to suc ceed at a giv en task, ev en when f ailure is experienced.
496
According to Bandur a’s theory (4), a person’ s self-efficacy is
derived from a number of sour ces:
Performance accompl ishment s—past experiences of success or
failure
Vicarious experiences —watching others (model ing)
Verbal persuasion —encour agement f rom sel f or others
Imaginal experience —using imagery to see onesel f perf orm
Physiological states—perception of arousal as facilitative or
debilitative
Emotional states —affect or mood
These sources translate well into sport and training environments
and can be influenced by the coaches as well as the athlete
themselv es.
It is thought that if an athlete has the necessary skill set and an
acceptable level of motiv ation, the resulting performance is largely
determined by self-efficacy (4). Skill alone is not enough to ensur e
effective performance— athletes have to want to perform well and
need to believe they can be successful in their endea vors.
Furthermor e, individuals’ level of self-efficacy influences the choices
made— whether toward certain activities that they feel confident
about or away from those about which confidence is lacking.
Similarly, this construct additional ly influences level of overall effort
as well as persistence in the face of obstacles, because those who
believe in themselv es gener ally work harder and are more
determined to attain the desired outcome than those without the
necessary levels of self-efficacy (64). Clearly , the perception of one’s
ability to successfully perform the tasks of sport or training has a
direct impact on the actual perf ormance.
Self-efficacy influences people’s choice of activity, their
level of effort in that activ ity, and how much persistence
they will have in the face of challenging obstacles.
497
Self-Talk
A technique frequently used to enhance self-efficacy , aid in directing
proper focus, assist in regulating arousal levels, and reinforce
motiv ation is self-talk . Self-talk, or intrapersonal communication, is
the inner dialogue we have with ourselv es (64). It is what we say to
ourselv es, either out loud or in our heads, that provides the
soundtr ack for our beha viors and perf ormances.
Self-talk is gener ally categoriz ed as positive, negativ e, or
instructional and can be either spontaneously gener ated or more
purposef ully used to gener ate changes in mood or behaviors (61).
Positive self-talk can include utterances or statements that are
encour aging (e.g., “Come on!”), motiv ational (e.g., “I can do this!”),
or reinforcing (e.g., “I am ready! ”) and gener ally reflects favorable
emotions or feelings. Negativ e self-talk gener ally reflects anger ,
discour agement, doubt, or negativ e judgment (e.g., “You suck!” “You
can’t do this.” “What were you thinking?”). Instructional self-talk
gener ally provides specific direction or focus on necessary
performance cues for a particular skill or strategy (e.g., “Feet
shoulder -width apart. ” “Keep y our torso er ect.”).
Positive and instructional ly focused self-talk have been found to
improve performance in laboratory settings; howev er, significant
individual and environmental differences may modify these findings
in actual performance settings (61). For example, instructional self-
talk can be harmf ul for expert performers, because relaying specific
performance cues may actively interfere with the automatici ty of the
movement. Furthermor e, some evidence exists that positive self-talk
can result in decreased self-efficacy in some performers (72).
Gener ally, howev er, negativ e self-talk is associated with poor
performance, because it directs one’s focus to inappr opriate cues,
can trigger negativ e emotional energy, and can decrease confidence.
Therefore, in order to emplo y self-talk most effectively, athletes
should begin by examining their current use of self-talk and its
effects on performance. Then, an assessment of the most
appropriate w ay to modi fy their sel f-talk can be made.
498
Goal Setting
Not surprisingl y, many of the concepts discussed in this chapter can
have a direct influence on one another . Self-efficacy is one of these
in that it has a significant impact on the types of goals people set for
themselv es. Those with higher confidence and efficacy gener ally
envision, create, and strive to accompl ish more challenging goals.
Goal setting  can be characteriz ed as a process whereby
progressively challenging standar ds of performance are pursued with
a defined criterion of task performance that increases the likelihood
of perceived success (35). For example, a goal for a swimmer may
be to execute a technical ly correct stroke throughout a sanctioned
distance, such as the 50-meter freestyle. In the beginning, the
swimmer ’s skill level might be so low that such a task would seem
overwhelming and produce a strong sense of failure and frustration,
yet physiologic al testing may show the coach that the athlete has
the physical resour ces to excel at such an event (i.e., the swimmer
has a high degree of fast-twitch, or type II, muscle fibers, exhibi ts
superior muscular power or speed-str ength in the upper and lower
body, and seems to have a high capaci ty for anaer obic metabol ism).
Howev er, the stroke mechanics are inefficient; the athlete is highly
aware of this and therefore lacks confidence. First, the coach and
athlete can break the skill and condi tioning units down into
manageable components (the traditional whole–part –whole method
of learning). Then as the athlete focuses on and masters each
component, a sense of progress and success is nurtur ed, developing
more confidence and better motiv ating the athlete to complete the
challenging goal.
Systematic goal setting can simultaneously increase the
psychological development and performance of the athlete (64). A
number of r easons explain wh y goal set ting af fects perf ormance:
Goals dir ect an athlete’ s attention b y priori tizing ef forts.
Goals increase effort because of the contingency of success on
goal at tainment.
499
Goals increase positive reinforcement through the feedback
given to athletes.
It seems that the informational nature of thoughtf ully derived goals,
which increase effort because they are challenging yet attainable, is
a powerf ul ingr edient in beha vioral change.
Process Goals
An important distinction related to setting goals is the difference
between the process  versus the outcome  (8). Process goals are
those over whose achiev ement the athlete has control. They focus
on the actions the individual must engage in during performance to
execute the skill well. If the effort is expended, success occurs with
a relatively high degree of probabi lity. Examples of process goals
within the skill domain relate to form and technique, although an
individual ly determined time (in the case of a swimmer or track
athlete) could also be consider ed a process goal. An example of a
process goal within strength and condi tioning is to have the athlete
focus on the strategy for weight reduction (e.g., what the athlete
must do on a daily basis, such as aerobic activity and dietary
modifications) rather than on the actual result (e.g., a loss of
weight), thereby increasing a sense of control over actions. With
process goals, suc cess is str ongly contingent on ef fort.
Outcome Goals
On the other hand, outcome goals are ones over which the athlete
has little control; typical ly, winning is the primary focus. Outcome
goals in sport gener ally focus on the competi tive result of an event,
so earning a medal, scoring points, and gener ating a high ranking
would all fall in this category . The accompl ishment of outcome goals
is contingent not only on individual effort but also on the efforts and
abilities of others—something out of the individual’ s personal control.
We believe that winning is a sound goal orientation that can surely
gener ate high levels of motiv ation but that, ironical ly, an athlete can
increase the likelihood of its achiev ement by having both a process
500