# Section 9.2

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 9: Psychological Foundations of Performance

**Section:** 9.2 -- Ideal Performance State

**PDF Pages:** 476--485

Theoretical Tenet s of Arousal, Anxiety,
and Motivation on Performance
Once an understanding of the gener al concepts of arousal, anxiet y,
and stress is attained, the next step lies in deconstructing  how these
emotional elements influence  performance. Why does arousal affect
one athlete beneficial ly and another detrimental ly? This section
examines a number of theories and models that attempt to explain
this relationship between arousal and performance. It begins with
the simplest construct —Hul l’s (56) drive theory —and builds on it
with Yerkes and Dodson’ s (76) inverted-U theory , describing the
mediating influences of skill level, task complexi ty, and personal ity.
Other related theories that further explain this relationship are
outlined, including Hanin’ s (23) individual zones of optimal
functioning (IZOF), Fazey and Hardy’s (24) catastr ophe theory , and
finally, Kerr’s (30) r eversal theory .
Drive Theory
When resear chers first started examining the relationshi p between
arousal and performance, it was thought to follow a direct and linear
progression. Hull’s drive theory  (56) proposes that as an
individual’ s arousal or state anxiet y increases, so too does
performance. Thus, the more psyched up athletes become, the
better they perform. This may hold true as an athlete progresses
from relatively low levels of arousal to somewhat higher amounts,
but most would recogniz e that more arousal is not always better,
because performers can clearly be too pumped up to perform well.
Depending on the skill and experience levels of the performer , the
complexi ty of the activity, or both, more arousal may be beneficial,
but it can in fact also be detrimental. When people perform well-
learned or simple skills, a higher level of arousal can benefi t
performance. Howev er, the more complex a given skill becomes, or
the less experience an athlet e has with that skill, the more arousal
476
can produce catastr ophic performance outcomes (64). Also, self-
confidence serves as a buffer for anxiet y, and when self-confidence
goes down, anxiet y typical ly incr eases.
Skill Level
An athlete’s skill level can increase the latitude of optimal arousal;
that is, the more skill an athlete has developed, the better he or she
can perform during states of less-than or greater-than-optimal
arousal (64). In the beginning stages of learning a skill, the athlete
is in a stage of analysis or cogni tion (17). This means that he or she
has to think about actions. For example, a novice basketball player
has to be conscious of the ball while dribbl ing and needs to devote
some attention  to the task. At a given level of arousal, worrisome
thoughts compete with an attentional capaci ty already filled with
details of motor performanc e (i.e., dribbl ing). If a new situation
suddenly develops, the novice’s mind is already occupied, and he or
she ma y not see i t.
The optimal arousal point is lower for less skilled athletes than for
more advanced athletes. Therefore, coaches should lower arousal
and decrease the decision-making responsibi lities of developing or
unseasoned athletes (players who are skilled but lack competi tive
experience) and have them focus on simple assignments to prevent
attentional overload. In coaching weightl ifting athletes during an
important meet, instructions to novice competi tors should be simple,
clear, and direct. When they experience success, the derived self-
confidence may reduce negativ e self-talk and the sense of
uncertaint y that t ypical ly char acteriz es such perf ormers.
Task Complexity
A second factor that influen ces the appropriate level of arousal to
achiev e optimal performance is task complexi ty (42). Most athletic
skills are exceedingly complex from a biomechanical perspectiv e, but
the more concerning comp lexity relates to consciou s decision
making. For example, running is a very complex task in terms of
477
motor control and functional anatom y, but athletes fortunately do
not have to devote much conscious attention to this coordinated
action. In fact, the action can become altered and inefficient if they
think about it too much, because they change the neural sequences
for movement initiation. From an attentional perspectiv e, simple or
well-learned skills are less affected by a high degree of arousal
because they have few task-relevant cues to monitor (64).
Fortunately , then, physiologic al arousal, which typical ly accompanies
emotional arousal, may be beneficial. Howev er, the situation is
dramatical ly reversed for skills that necessi tate consciou s decision-
making effort, such as those required by a goalie in soccer or a
basebal l catcher who is facing a critical, bases-loaded pitch. In these
instances, arousal must be optimiz ed because of the need to
maintain a wider f ocus so as to r ecogniz e relevant at tentional cues.
Inverted-U Theory
Building on the basic relationship outlined in drive theory , Yerkes and
Dodson (76) proposed one of the major tenets of the arousal–
performance relationship—th e inverted-U theory . Basically, this
theory states that arousal facilitates performance up to an optimal
level, beyond which further increases in arousal are associated with
reduced performance. Figure 9.2 graphically shows this relationship .
Most coaches and athletes intuitively accept this hypothesis, because
they have all experienced poor performance when feeling flat or
under -aroused, as well as when they feel too amped up or out of
control. The inverted-U concept helps coaches and athletes
understand why arousal affects performance and enables them to
gain greater control over the appropriate level of arousal for a given
athlete within a given sport. It should be noted, howev er, that the
generic shape of the curve in this relationship has been criticized,
given our understanding of the individual influences of skill, ability,
experience, and task complexi ty as described pr eviously (20).
478
Individual Zones of Optimal Functioning
Theory
Hanin (23) noted the interactions of individual factors that affect
optimal arousal for performance and developed the individual
zones of optimal functioning  theory . Dr. Hanin holds that
different people, in different types of performances, perform best
with very different levels of arousal. This theory differs from the
inverted-U hypothesis in two ways: (1) Ideal performance does not
seem to always occur at the midpoint of the arousal continuum, and
(2) rather than there being a single defined arousal point at which
optimal performance occurs across sporting activities, the best
performance can occur within a small range, or bandwidth, of
arousal level. Further , Hanin  proposed that there are positive and
negativ e emotions (e.g., excited and nervous) that can gener ate
enhanced performance, just as there are positive and negativ e
emotions (e.g., comfortable and annoyed) that can debilitate
performance. This proposal is important because it recogniz es that
any specific emotion can be positively perceived by one athlete but
negativ ely perceived by another . In practice, then, athletes can
retrospectiv ely recall the arousal associated with several of their
performances that differ in quality. They can then monitor emotions
and arousal levels before an important match and make adjustments
to incr ease the chances of f alling into this individual ideal z one.
479
FIGURE 9.2  Inverted-U theory and i ts modi fications.
Reprinted by permission from B.D. Hatfield and G.A. Walford, “Understanding Anxiety: Implications for Sport
Performance,” National Strength and Conditioning Association Journal 9 (1987): 60-61.
Catastrophe Theory
According to Hardy (24), assessment of the cogni tive and somatic
dimensions of arousal can sharpen the ability to predict (and
therefore control) their impact on performance. Earlier assumptions
associated with the inverted-U theory held that increases in arousal
beyond the optimal level resulted in gradual, proportionate declines
in performance. Howev er, common observ ation tells us that this is
not always the case— an athlete may suffer a severe and
catastr ophic decline rather than a gradual quadr atic or curvilinear
480
decline in performance, and restoring a degree of calm does not
necessari ly bring a return to the level of performance exhibi ted
before the decline. In this model, the catastrophe theory , somatic
arousal has a curvilinear, inverted-U relationship to athletic
performance, whereas cogni tive anxiet y shows a stead y negativ e
relationship to performance. When increases in physiologi cal arousal
occur in the presence of cogni tive anxiet y, a sudden drop—r ather
than a gradual decline—in  performance occurs. The practical
implication of this theory is that the arousal constructs need to be
more clearly delineated as cogni tive anxiet y, physiological arousal,
somatic anxiet y, or some combination of these.
Reversal Theory
Kerr’s (30) interpr etation of reversal theory  posits that the way in
which arousal and anxiet y affect performance depends on the
individual’ s interpr etation of that arousal. Essential ly, one athlete
might interpret high levels of arousal as excitement and indicativ e of
performance readiness , while another athlete, experiencing the
same emotion at the same arousal level, would interpr et that feeling
as unpleasant and reflectiv e of a lack of confidence. This idea
implies that athletes have within their power the ability to reverse
their interpretation of their own arousal; instead of perceiving high
arousal as scary and worriso me, they can choose to reverse their
perception and interpr et the arousal as reflecting excitement and
anticipation. This theory is important because it emphasiz es that
one’s interpretation of arousal, and not just its amount, is significant.
Further , it shows that the way in which arousal and anxiet y influence
performance— whether they are beneficial or detrimental to
performance—is wi thin the contr ol of the individual.
481
Motivation
As mentioned earlier in this chapter , motiv ation is a primary
psychological factor in the acquisi tion and effective performance of
motor skills. Motivation  can be defined as the intensi ty and
direction of effort (64). Selected aspects of motiv ational phenomena
are highlighted in the following sections. We first discuss intrinsic
and extrinsic motiv ation, which greatly influence the athlete’ s desire
to train and compete. Then we discuss achiev ement motiv ation,
which helps to explain individual differences in competi tiveness.
Finally, positive and negativ e reinforcement are explained as they
apply to ski ll learning and perf ormance.
Intrinsic and Extrinsic Motivation
Intrinsic motivation  is important for any athlete. Deci (13)
defined this construct as a desire to be competent and self-
determining. With intrinsic motiv ation, athletes are driven because of
their love of the game and the inherent reward they feel from
participation. This is motiv ation that comes from within the athlete
and is exhibi ted regardless of the existence of material reward or
punishment. Intrinsical ly motiv ated athletes focus on the enjoyment
or fun they experience in the activity and gener ally desire to learn
and improve because of this love for the behavior in and of itself
(64). How can such a desirable state be maintained or encour aged?
The answer lies in Deci’s (13) defini tion, which stresses success
(competence) and “pulling one’s own strings” (self-determination).
Appropriate goals, especial ly for training (i.e., process) or
performance (i.e., product),  can increase perceived competence.
Additional ly, giving the athlete some latitude in decision making
increases perceived self-determination (13). Although authori tarian
behavior is sometimes warranted in sport, in that clear directives are
needed in a stressful and competi tive environment, a total lack of
delegated responsibi lities could result in a loss of initiative and drive
in athletes (64).
482
In opposition, extrinsic motivation  is motivation that comes
from some external as opposed to internal source. Numer ous
examples of this exist, because it is founded on an individual ized
reward construct; examples of more common extrinsic rewards in
sport settings include awards, trophies, praise from coaches and
teammates, social approval, and fear of punishment. It should be
noted that athletes are rarely completely intrinsical ly or extrinsical ly
motiv ated; rather, they exhibi t varying degrees along this motiv ation
continuum depending on the activity, their perceptions of
competence, the level of importance the activity has, and a host of
other v ariables (11, 13, 38, 64 , 68).
Achievement Motivation
Within the gener al construct of motiv ation lies a more specifically
targeted type called achievement motivation , which refers to a
person’ s efforts to master a task, achiev e excellence, overcome
obstacles, and engage in competition or social comparison . All things
being equal between two athletes, whoev er is higher in achievement
motiv ation will be the better athlete because he or she has a greater
appeti te for competi tion (64).
McClel land and colleagues (38) theoriz ed that all people have
opposing personal ity traits within themselv es: the motive to
achieve success (MAS)  and the motive to avoid failure (MAF) .
The MAS relates to the capacity to experience pride in one’s
accompl ishments and is characteriz ed by a desire to challenge
onesel f and evaluate one’s abilities. On the other hand, the MAF
relates to the desire to protect one’s ego and self-esteem. Despi te its
name, however, MAF is not really about avoiding failure itself. It is
more about avoiding the perception of shame that accompanies the
failure.
Gener ally, MAS-dominated athletes are most intrigued by
situations that are either uncertain or challenging, with an
approximate 50% probabi lity of success (64). This creates
opportuni ties to assess one’s abilities. On the other hand, MAF-
483
dominated players are more comfortable in situations in which it is
either very easy to achiev e success (thereby avoiding shame) or so
extremely difficult that there would be no expectation of winning
(again, eliminating the likelihood of feeling shame) (64). At higher
levels of sport involvement,  it is unlikely that athletes would be
dominated by MAF, but they would certainly show degrees or a
range of competi tiveness. Confronted by a very challenging goal,
such as gaining a significant amount of lean muscle weight during
the hypertr ophy phase of a periodiz ed cycle, the MAF-dominated
individual might r educe ef fort because he or she f ears f ailure and the
threat to self-esteem (and might also claim that the goal is
unrealistic), whereas the MAS-dominated individual might heighten
effort in r esponse to the chal lenge and not per ceive any threat.
Motivational Aspects of Skill Learning
(Self-Controlled Practice)
In addition to providing the individual with informatio n for skill
acquisi tion, practice, instructions, and feedback can also act as
motiv ational factors for enhancing performance. Practice schedules
that address the fundamen tal psychological needs of autonom y,
competence, and social relatedness can influence motiv ation (73). Of
interest in the motor learning literature is the role of self-
controlled practice  in enhancing motiv ation, performance, and
skill learning. Self-contr olled practice involves the athlete in decisions
related to the practice structu re, including when to receive feedback
or which skill to practice; it also involves simply asking athletes how
they believe they are doing (10, 11, 12, 73). This promotes a more
active involvement in the practice session and can enhance feelings
of competence and auton omy (11, 12). As a result of this
heightened motiv ation, performance and learning improve (11, 12).
Engaging the athletes in some decisions related to the practice
schedule is an easy yet effective way to allow them autonom y and
ownership in reaching their sport performance goals. The concepts
484
of instructions, feedback, and practice schedules are discussed in
greater depth later in this chapter .
Positive and Negative Reinforcement in
Coaching
Coaches can also benefi t from understanding the concepts of
positive and negativ e reinforcement and positive and negativ e
punishment as they relate to motiv ation (37). Positive
reinforcement  is the act of increasing the probabi lity of occurrence
of a given behavior (a target behavior, such as correct footwork in
basketball, is termed an operant ) by following  it with a positive
action, object, or event such as praise, decals on the helmet, or
prizes and awards. Negative reinforcement  also increases the
probabi lity of occurrence of a given operant, but it is accompl ished
through the removal of an act, object, or event that is typical ly
aversive. For example, if the team showed great hustle in practice
(i.e., the operant is enthu siasm and hustle), the coach could
announce that no wind sprints would be required at the session’ s
end. This coaching reinforcement style focuses attention on what the
athlete is doing corr ectly.
Punishment, on the other hand, is designed to decrease the
occurrence of a given operant—that is, negativ e behaviors such as
mistak es or a lack of effort. Positive punishment  is the
presentation of an act, object, or event following a behavior that
could decrease the behavior’s occurrence. An example is
reprimanding a player after a mistak e or making an athlet e do push-
ups or sprints after a fumble. Negative punishment , or the
removal of something valued, could take the form of revoking
privileges or playing time, as in benching. Although coaches use a
mixtur e of both reward and punishment, reinforcement (i.e.,
reward), or a positive approach, is arguably better because it
focuses on what athletes should  do and what they did right (termed
specific positive feedback ). Reinforcement (both positive and
negativ e) increases task-relevant focus rather than worry focus. A
485