# Section 10.3

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 10: Basic Nutritional Factors Affecting Health

**Section:** 10.3 -- Macronutrients

**PDF Pages:** 556--575

above recommended levels for building and repairing muscle, are
not recommended because carboh ydrate and fat intake (and the
nutrients commonly found in carboh ydrate- and fat-rich foods) may
be compr omised. The protein content of commonly consumed foods
is listed in table 10.8 .
Athletes requ ire more than the RDA for protein to build
and repair muscle. Depending on the sport and the
training program, 1.2 to 2.0 grams per kilogram body
weight of protein is recommended.
Carbohydrate
Carbohydrate  primari ly serves as a source of energy. Howev er,
carboh ydrate is not an essential nutrient, because the body can
break down the carbon skeletons of certain amino acids and convert
them into glucose (i.e., gluconeogenesis). Carboh ydrates are
composed of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen. Carboh ydrates can be
classified into three groups according to the number of sugar
(saccharide) units they contain: monosac charides, disaccharides,
and polysac charides.
Monosaccharides  (glucose , fructose , and galactose ) are
single-sugar molecules. In the body, glucose is present as circulating
sugar in the blood, where it is used as the primary energy substr ate
for cells. In addition, glucose molecules make up glycogen, a
polysac charide stored in muscle and liver cells. In food, glucose is
typical ly combined with other monosac charides to form various
sugars, such as sucrose. Isolated glucose found in candy or sport
drinks is found in the form of dextrose, a chemical isomer of
glucose. Fructose has the same chemical formula as glucose, but
because the atoms are arranged differently, it tastes much sweeter
and has different properties. Fructose accounts for the sweet taste
of honey and occurs naturally in fruits and vegetables. In the body,
fructose causes less insulin secretion than other sugars, which has
made it a focus of much resear ch in the area of aerobic endur ance
556
performance. Galactose, the third monosac charide, combines with
glucose to f orm lactose, mi lk sugar .
TABLE 10.8  Protein Content of Common Foods
FoodServing
sizeServing size in
gramsAverage amount of protein
(in grams) per serving
Almonds 1/4 cup 39 8
Bacon, pork 3 slices 27.3 11
Beef, ground, 80% lean,
pan br owned3 oz 85 23
Black beans 1/2 cup 92.5 7.5
Cashews 1/4 cup 32 5.5
Cheese, f eta 1 oz 28 4
Cheese sl ice, cheddar 1 slice 21 5.5
Cheese sl ice, S wiss 1 slice 28 7.5
Cheese, string, part
skim1 oz (1
stick)28 7
Chicken breast 3 oz 85 25
Chicken, thigh wi th skin 1 111 28
Clams, in shel l 3 oz 85 22
Cottage cheese, 1% 4 oz 113 14
Deli turkey 5 oz 142 19
Edamame 1/2 cup 73.5 8.5
Egg, whole, lar ge 1 56 7
Garbanz o beans 1/3 cup 83.5 6
Goat cheese, soft 1 oz 28 5
Greek y ogurt, nonf at 6 oz 170 17
Data from U.S. Department of Agricul ture, Agricul tural Resear ch Service, Beltsville Human
Nutrition R esear ch Center . FoodData Centr al. Available f rom https:// fdc.nal.usda .gov/.
557
FoodServing
sizeServing size in
gramsAverage amount of protein
(in grams) per serving
Hambur ger pat ty 3 oz 85 22
Herring, pickled ¼ cup 35 5
Hot dog, beef 1 50 6
Kidney beans 1/2 cup 88.5 7.5
Kielbasa, beef polska 2 oz 56 7
Lamb chop 3 oz 85 24
Lima beans 1/2 cup 94 7
Lobster , steamed 3 oz 85 16
Mahimahi fish, bak ed 3 oz 85 20
Milk, 1%, low -fat 8 fl oz 245 8
Mussels, steamed 3 oz 85 20
Oysters, r aw 4 oz 113 6.5
Peanut but ter 2 tbsp 32 8
Peanuts 1/4 cup 35.5 9
Pistachios 1/4 cup 30.5 7
Pork, ham 3 oz 85 15
Pork tenderloin 3 oz 85 23
Salmon, canned 2 oz 56 13
Salmon, fi let, bak ed 3 oz 85 17
Sausage l inks 3 links 63 10
Shrimp , large 4 22 5
Sirloin steak 3 oz 85 26
Soy milk 8 fl oz 245 8
Soy nuts 1/4 cup 23 9
Data from U.S. Department of Agricul ture, Agricul tural Resear ch Service, Beltsville Human
Nutrition R esear ch Center . FoodData Centr al. Available f rom https:// fdc.nal.usda .gov/.
558
FoodServing
sizeServing size in
gramsAverage amount of protein
(in grams) per serving
Tilapia, fi let, bak ed 3 oz 85 22
Tortilla, flour , 8 in. 1 51 4.5
Trout, fi let, bak ed 3 oz 85 20
Tuna, canned 3 oz (1/2
can)85 22
Turkey breast, r oasted 3 oz 85 25
Turkey, ground cook ed 3 oz 85 23
Turkey, sausage smok ed 1 oz 28 4
Wheat bagel, 5 in. 1 bagel 98 10
Wheat br ead 1 slice 29 3
Veal steak 3 oz 85 21
Venison r oast 3 oz 85 25
Whey pr otein powder
isolate1 oz 30 20
Yogurt, Gr eek, plain,
low-fat1 cup 245 24
Yogurt, plain, low -fat 1 cup 245 13
Data from U.S. Department of Agricul ture, Agricul tural Resear ch Service, Beltsville Human
Nutrition R esear ch Center . FoodData Centr al. Available f rom https:// fdc.nal.usda .gov/.
Disaccharides  (sucrose , lactose,  and maltose ) are composed
of two simple sugar units joined together . Sucrose (or table sugar),
the most common disaccharide, is a combination of glucose and
fructose. Sucrose occurs naturally in most fruits and is crystal lized
from the syrup of sugar cane and sugar beets to make brown, white,
or powd ered sugar. Lactose (glucose + galactose) is found only in
mammal ian milk. Maltose (glucose + glucose) occurs primari ly when
polysac charides are broken down during digestion. It also occurs in
559
the fermentatio n process of alcohol and is the primary carboh ydrate
in beer .
Polysaccharides , also known as complex carboh ydrates, contain
up to thousands of glucose units. Some of the most common
polysac charides of nutritional importance are starch, fiber, and
glycogen. Starch is the storage form of glucose in plants. Grains,
legumes, and vegetables are good sources of starch. Before starch
can be used as a source of energy, it must be broken down into
glucose compo nents. Dietary fiber, a consti tuent of the plant cell
wall, is also a form of carbo hydrate. Cellulose, hemicel lulose, beta-
glucans, and pectins are fibers; these and noncarboh ydrate fibrous
materials (lignins) are partial ly resistant to human digestiv e
enzymes. Fibers have different physiological effects in the body.
Some delay gastric emptying, which may tempor arily influence
feelings of fullness, while other types of fiber increase bulk and
water content, reducing constipation and decreasing transit time of
feces. In addition, some soluble fibers decrease the absorption of
cholester ol and may therefore help reduce blood cholester ol levels
after ingestion  (104), while prebiotic dietary fibers selectiv ely
stimulate the growth of bacteria in the gut (33, 133). Fiber-rich
foods include beans, peas, bran, many fruits and vegetables, and
some whole-gr ain foods.
Glycogen  is found in small (80, 161) amounts in human liver and
muscle, totaling approximately 15 grams of glycogen per kilogram
body weight (1) and in animal tissue as a tempor ary source of
stored energy (22). While present in animal meats we eat such as
steak, chicken breast, and fish fillets, it is not present to any large
extent. When glucose enters the muscles and liver, if it is not
metabol ized for energy it can be synthesiz ed to form glycogen.
Three-quarters of the glycogen in the body is stored in skeletal
muscle; the remaining quarte r is stored in the liver (22). The process
of con verting glucose to gly cogen is cal led glycogenesis .
Athletes typical ly consume a variety of carboh ydrates in their
normal diets. Howev er, when they want to improve the quality of
560
their diet, by consuming fewer foods that have untow ard effects on
overall health or performance, they may consider macronutrient
ranking systems such as the gly cemic index or gly cemic load.
Glycemic Index and Glycemic Load
The glycemic index (GI) ranks carboh ydrates according to how
quickly they are digested and absorbed, and therefore raise blood
glucose levels, in the 2-hour time period after a meal, compar ed to
the same amount (by weight in grams) of a reference food, typical ly
white bread or glucose, which is giv en a GI of 100 (78).
Glycemic index = Incremental area under the curve for the blood glucose
response after consumption of a 25 or 50g carbohydrate portion of a test food
÷ Incremental area under the curve for the blood glucose response after
consumption of the same portion (in grams) of a standard food × 100      
(10.1)
Low-GI foods are digested and absorbed slowly , resulting in a
smaller rise in blood glucose and subsequent insulin release from the
pancr eas compar ed to the reference food (7, 78). Insulin helps lower
blood glucose levels by facilitating glucose transport into cells. The
fate of glucose within cells depends on where it is shuttled. For
instance, muscle cells use glucose for energy while fat cells convert
glucose into trigly cerides (f at).
Though the GI was develope d to help people better control their
blood sugar levels—something that is particularly helpful for those
with diabetes —resear ch in large cohorts of participants has
suggested that diets with high versus low GI foods are associated
with increased incidence of type 2 diabetes, cardiovascular disease,
diabetes-r elated cancers, and all-cause mortal ity (49, 79). Howev er,
the GI system has a few issues that may limit its accuracy. First,
published GI values for a given type of food may vary consider ably
due to differences in testing and variations in ingredients used;
ripeness of food; and method of food processing, cooking, and
storage (28, 62). Secondly , consuming carboh ydrate as part of a
meal or in different quanti ties affects the GI (7, 8). Low-GI foods
561
gener ally include vegetables, legumes, beans, and whole grains
(table 10.9 ).
TABLE 10.9  Glycemic Index (GI) of Various Foods
Low-GI foods (<55) Medium-GI foods (55-69) High-GI foods (>70)
Apple juice, unsweetened
Banana, ripe
Carrots, raw
Chocolate, mi lk and dark
Corn torti lla
Grapefruit
Ice cream
Kidney beans
Lentils
Milk, soy or dairy
Orange, r aw
Quinoa, cook ed
Tomato juice
Yogurt, f ruitBrown rice, boi led
Carrots, boi led
Couscous
Honey
Muesl i
Pineapple, r aw
Popcorn
Potato, French f ries
Rice v ermicel li
Rolled oats, quick
Soft drink, soda
Spaghet ti, pasta, boi led
Sweet potato , boiled
Tropical blend f ruit drinkCornflak es cer eal
English muf fin
Glucose
Jellybeans
Potato, boiled
Potato, instant mashed
Rice cr ackers, crisps
Rice mi lk
Shredded wheat
Tofu-based f rozen dessert
Watermelon, r aw
White bread
White rice, boi led
Whole wheat br ead
Based on A tkinson et al. (2021).
Since the GI indicates how quickly a carboh ydrate-rich food
affects blood glucose levels, it is hypothesiz ed that eating foods with
different GI values before, during, and after exercise can affect
exercise performance (111). Consumption of a low-GI meal before
exercise can lead to a reduced blood glucose and insulin response,
which has been proposed to help promote fat oxidation and maintain
normal blood glucose levels during exercise (156). Although some
scientists have speculated that consumption of low-GI foods before
exercise might  spare carboh ydrate by minimizing insulin secretion
and therefore improve performance, evidence to support this
hypothesis is inefficient (111). The resear ch is mixed, with some
studies showin g that consumption of a low-GI food as compar ed to a
high-GI food before exercise improves exercise time to exhaustion
(41, 162) and others finding that consuming a preexercise low-GI
food versus a high-GI food had no effect on running and aerobic
562
endur ance exercise performance (29, 155). Therefore, athletes who
use the GI to guide their food choices while balancing health and
performance can maintain an adequate amount of dietary
carboh ydrate with low-GI foods as the base of their choices while
sticking with high-GI foods in and around exercise training to provide
immediate sources of energy (sugar) for activity (25) and to more
rapidly r eplenish gly cogen stor es (86).
The glycemic load (GL) takes the amount of carboh ydrate, in
grams, in a portion of food into account —a factor that also
influences glycemic response. Because GL takes portion size into
account, it is a more realistic gauge of glycemic response than the
GI, which is based on a stand ard serving size. Table 10.10 shows the
difference in GI and GL f or speci fic foods.
The GL is equal to the GI multiplied by the amount of
carboh ydrate in a portion of the f ood and dividing this total b y 100.
Glycemic load = GI of an individual food × grams of carbohydrate per
serving   of food ÷ 100      (10.2)
Foods with a higher GL are expected to lead to greater increases in
blood sugar and subsequent  insulin release (7, 8). A low-GL diet,
combined with exercise, has been shown to improve insulin
sensitivity in older, obese adults and therefore may be a potential
treatment for this population (90), while observ ational and
interv ention studies suggest that low-GI and low-GL diets are
associated with lower levels of inflammatory markers and fasting
insulin (79). Chronic low-grade inflammation is considered a
potential risk factor for chronic diseases (21). In addition, some
(though not all) studies have found that diets with a lower GI or GL
are associated  with lower levels of fasting insulin as well as fewer
cardiovascular risk f actors (67 , 145).
Fiber
Diets low in fiber  have been associated with constipation, heart
disease, colon cancer , and type 2 diabetes. The DRI for fiber ranges
from 21 to 25 grams per day for women (depending on age,
563
pregnancy , and lactation) and 30 to 38 grams per day for men based
on age group. Fiber is comm only found in fruits, vegetables, nuts,
seeds, legume s, and whole-gr ain products such as whole-gr ain
bread, oatmeal, and popcorn.
Health Factors Associated With Food
Sensitivities and Allergies
A food allergy is defined as “an adverse health effect arising from a specific
immune response that occurs reproducibly on exposur e to a given food,” and a
food sensitivity, also known as food intoler ance, is defined as “nonimmune
reactions that include metabol ic, toxic, pharmacologic, and undefined mechanisms”
(17). Reactions to food allergies range in severity from rash to anaph ylaxis, which
is life-threatening (151). The eight most common food allergens in the United
States are cow’s milk, wheat, eggs, tree nuts, peanut, fish, shellfish, and soy (53);
these foods must be identi fied on ingredient labels to prevent adverse reaction in
affected individuals (10). Celiac disease (CD) is a type of food allergy triggering an
immune response to dietary gluten, a protein found in cereals such as wheat, rye,
and barley (97). Food intoler ances, especial ly self-reported, are more prevalent
than food allergies (53); a United States–based survey among adults showed that
the prevalence of self-reported food intoler ances was 25% (77). The most
common food intoler ance is to lactose, affecting nearly 65% of the population
(53). Some food intolerances cannot be readily explained and are classified as
undefined; a well-known example of this is irritable bowel syndr ome (IBS),
characteriz ed by abdominal pain, bloating, abdominal distension, flatulence,
constipation, or diarrhea (151). Dietary management of food sensitivities often
includes elimination diets, where common trigger foods are removed from the diet,
and then slowly reintroduced (151). Individuals with food allergies and intoler ances
should work wi th a r egister ed dieti tian to ensur e nutri tional needs ar e met.
Fat
Although the terms fat and lipid are often used interchangeably ,
lipid is a broader term. Lipids include triglycerides  (fats and oils) as
well as related  fatty compounds, such as sterols and phospholipids.
The lipids of greatest significance in nutrition are triglycerides, fatty
acids , phosphol ipids, and cholester ol. Triglycerides are formed by
the union of glycerol with three fatty acids. The majori ty of lipids
564
found in foods and in the body are in the triglyceride form, and
within this chapter the term fat refers to trigly cerides.
TABLE 10.10  Glycemic Index and Glycemic Load
FoodServing
size (g)Glycemic
index (GI;
glucose =
100)Available
carbohydrates
(g/serving)Glycemic
load (GL; per
serving)
Angel f ood cak e 50 67 ± 5 29 19
Apple (di fferent
varieties)120 38 ± 2 15 6
Apple juice,
unsweetened(250 mL)
8.5 fl oz40 ± 1 29 12
Bagel, whi te, frozen 70 72 35 25
Banana, ripe 120 51 25 13
Blueberry muf fin 60 50 ± 3 31 15
Cheese pizza
(Pillsbury Canada Ltd)100 60 27 16
Chocolate mi lk
(powder dissolv ed in
milk)250 mL
(8.5 fl oz)43 11 5
Chocolate pudding,
instant, made f rom
powder and whole
milk100 47 ± 4 16 7
Corn, sweet 150 53 ± 4 32 17
English muf fin 30 77 ± 7 14 11
Grapes 120 46 ± 3 18 8
Ice cream 50 61 ± 7 13 8
Jellybeans 30 80 ± 8 28 22
Kidney beans, canned 150 52 17 9
Based on A tkinson et al. (2008).
565
FoodServing
size (g)Glycemic
index (GI;
glucose =
100)Available
carbohydrates
(g/serving)Glycemic
load (GL; per
serving)
Mashed potatoes,
instant150 85 ± 3 20 17
Muesl i 30 55 ± 10 19 11
Oatmeal, pr epared 50 69 35 24
Plantain 120 68 ± 6 31 21
Potato chips 50 51 ± 7 24 12
Raisins 60 64 ± 11 44 28
Rice, br own
(steamed, US A)150 50 33 16
Rice, whi te, long
grain, boi led 20-30
min150 50 36 18
Soft drink 250 mL
(8.5 fl oz)63 26 16
Strawberries 120 40 ± 7 3 1
Sweet potato , boiled 150 61 ± 7 28 17
Tomato juice 250 mL
(8.5 fl oz)23 ± 6 7 2
Vanilla wafers 25 77 18 14
Whole wheat br ead 30 72 ± 6 12 8
Yogurt, low -fat
(0.9%), wi ld
strawberry200 31 ± 14 30 9
Based on A tkinson et al. (2008).
Like carboh ydrate, fat contains carbon, oxygen, and hydrogen
atoms, but because the fatty acid chains have more carbon and
hydrogen relative to oxygen, they provide more energy per gram.
For example, fats provide approximately 9 kcal/g, while
566
carboh ydrates and protein provide approximately 4 kcal/g. Dietary
fats and oi ls are composed of di fferent types of f atty acids.
Saturated  fatty acids have no double bonds, and their carbon
molecules are saturated with hydrogen. Saturated fatty acids are
used for certain physiologica l and structur al functions, but the body
can make these fatty acids; therefore, there is no dietary
requirement for saturated fatty acids. Unsatur ated fatty acids contain
some carbon molecules that are joined together by double bonds,
making them more chemical ly reactiv e. Fatty acids containing one
double bond are monounsaturated . With two or more double
bonds, a fatty acid is polyunsaturated . Two polyunsatur ated fatty
acids are consider ed essentia l, meaning that the body cannot make
them: omega-6 and omega-3 fatty acids. These two fatty acids are
necessary for the formation of healthy cell membr anes, proper
development and functioning of the brain and nervous system, and
hormone production. Omega-6 fatty acids are abundant in the food
supply and found in foods such as soybean, corn, and safflower oil
and products made with these oils. Fewer foods contain omega-3
fatty acids; these include fish, particularly fatty fish such as salmon,
herring, halibut, trout, and mackerel, which contain the omega-3
fatty acids eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA)  and docosahexaenoic
acid (DHA) . Eicosapentaenoic acid and DHA are tied to a dose-
dependent decrease in triglycerides; a small, but statistical ly
significant, decrease in blood pressure, especial ly in the elderly; and
potential antiarrh ythmic ef fects (106, 113).
One could also consume flaxseeds, walnuts, soybean oil, or
canola oil to meet omega-3 requirements since these contain the
omega-3 fatty acid alpha-linolenic acid (ALA) , which is
converted to EPA and DHA. Howev er, this conversion process is
inefficient. According to vivo studies, approximately 5% of ALA is
converted to EPA, and <0.5% of ALA is converted to DHA in adults
(129). Therefore, while foods that contain ALA count toward one’s
omega-3 intake, they do not have a substantial effect on EPA and
DHA levels in the body. Foods rich in ALA may improve some risk
567
factors for cardiovascular disease; howev er, it is not clear which is
responsible— ALA, the other compounds in these nutrient -rich foods,
or a combinat ion of the two (43). In addition to its physiological
functions, fat is important because it is responsibl e for the
characteristic flavor, aroma, and textur e of many foods. Gener ally,
most dietary fats and oils are a mix of all three types of fatty acids,
with one type predominating. Soy, corn, sunflower , and safflower oils
are relatively high in polyunsatur ated fatty acids; olive, peanut, and
canola oils are high in monou nsatur ated fatty acids; and most animal
fats and tropical oils (e.g., coconut, palm kernel) are relatively high
in saturated fatty acids. See table 10.11 for fat content of common
foods.
When stored in the human body, fat serves many functions.
Energy is stored primari ly as adipose tissue in humans, but small
amounts are also found in skeletal muscle, especial ly in aerobical ly
trained athletes (142). Body fat insulates and protects organs,
regulates hormones, and carries and stores the fat-soluble vitamins
A, D, E, and K.
Relationship With Cholesterol
Cholesterol  is a waxy, fat-like substa nce that is an important
structur al and functional component of all cell membr anes.
Additional ly, cholester ol is used for the production of bile salts,
vitamin D, and several hormones, including the sex hormones
(estrogen, androgen, and progester one) as well as cortisol. Though
cholester ol has many essential functions in the body, high levels of
cholester ol may lead to atheroscler osis, hardening of the arteries
due to plaque buildup on artery walls, which narrows the area within
arteries through which blood can pass. Therefore, having high levels
of blood cholester ol is a risk f actor f or heart disease and str oke.
High levels of total cholester ol, low-density lipoproteins
(LDL) , and triglycerides are all associated with increased risk of
heart disease. Low-densi ty lipoprotein is further divided into
subfractions based on particle size. Smaller, more dense particles,
568
called very low-density lipoproteins (VLDL) , are more
atherogenic (artery clogging) than larger LDL particles (50). High
levels of saturated or trans fats, weight gain, and anorexia can all
increase LDL cholester ol (159). Howev er, VLDL levels increase with
increasing intake of carboh ydrate (116). High levels of high-
density lipop roteins (HDL ) are protectiv e against heart disease
but are not a target of therapy (practitioners are told not to focus on
HDL). Table 10.12  shows how LDL, total, and HDL cholester ol are
classified.
High intake of refined carboh ydrates, weight gain, excessiv e
alcohol intake, and very-low-fat diets can increase triglycerides
(blood fats). Howev er, as with cholester ol, several factors affect
triglycerides, including a sedentary lifestyle, overweight or obesity,
smoking, genetics, and certain diseases and medications (126, 159).
For optimal cardiovascular health, and risk reduction of chronic
diseases, the Scientific Report of the 2020 Dietary Guidel ines
Advisory Commi ttee recommends limiting saturated fat to less than
10% of total calories and replacing saturated fat with unsatur ated
fat, particularly polyunsatur ated fat. As of June 2018, partial ly
hydrogenated oils (PHOs), the major source of artificial trans fat in
the food supply , and a major cause of dyslipidemia, are no longer
Gener ally Recogniz ed as Safe (GRAS). Therefore, PHOs are no
longer added to foods. In addition, it is advised that added sugars,
particularly from sugar -sweetened beverages, desser ts, sweet
snacks, candies, and sweetened breakfast cereals, are consumed at
a maximum of 10% of total calories (154).
Fat and Performance
Both intramuscular and circulating fatty acids are potential energy
sources during exercise. Compar ed with the limited capacity of the
body to store carboh ydrate, fat stores are large and represent a vast
source of fuel for exercise (20). For example, a lean runner who is
160 pounds (72 kg) with 4% body fat has approximately 22,400
calories stored within fat tissue (57). At rest and during low-intensi ty
569
exercise, a high percentage of the energy produced is derived from
fatty acid oxidation (137). When the intensi ty of exercise increases,
there is a gradual shift from fat to carboh ydrate as the preferred
source of fuel. Consistent aerobic training increases the muscle’ s
capaci ty to use fatty acids (82). In addition to training , the body
adapts to using greater amounts of fat for energy when a higher -fat,
lower -carboh ydrate diet is consumed over a period of time (60, 82).
Because the type of diet to which the body is adapted may influence
performance (69), the effects of high-f at, low-carboh ydrate diets
vary, depending on the individual (128, 136, 138).
TABLE 10.11  Fat Content of Common Foods
FoodServing
sizeServing
size (g)Total
fat
(g)Saturated
fat (g)Mono-
unsaturated
fat (g)Poly-
unsaturated
fat (g)
Almond but ter 1 tbsp 32 17.7 1.3 10.4 4.3
Almonds,
whole22 each 26 13.1 1.0 8.3 3.3
Avocado 1/4 each 50 7.3 1.1 4.9 0.9
Beef, ground,
80% lean, pan
browned3 oz 85 14.8 5.6 6.5 0.4
Beef, sirloin
steak3 oz 85 13.4 5.3 5.6 0.5
Butter, dairy 1 tbsp 14 11.5 7.3 3.0 0.4
Cashews,
whole, dry
roasted1/4 cup 34 15.9 3.1 9.4 2.7
Cheese,
cheddar , low-
fat1 slice 28 2.0 1.2 0.6 0.1
Data from U.S. Department of Agricul ture, Agricul tural
Resear ch Service, Beltsville Human Nutrition Resear ch
Center . FoodData Centr al. Available from https:// fdc.nal
.usda .gov/.
570
FoodServing
sizeServing
size (g)Total
fat
(g)Saturated
fat (g)Mono-
unsaturated
fat (g)Poly-
unsaturated
fat (g)
Cheese,
mozzar ella,
part-skim,
shredded1/4 cup 28 5.6 3.2 1.6 0.3
Chia seeds 1/4 cup 42 12.9 1.4 1.0 9.9
Chicken, thigh
with skin3 oz 85 12.5 3.5 5.3 2.5
Coconut oi l 1 tbsp 14 13.4 11.2 0.9 0.2
Dark chocolate 1 oz 28 9.1 5.4 2.8 0.3
Egg, lar ge 1 50 5.3 1.6 2.0 0.7
Flaxseed,
ground1 tbsp 7 3.0 0.3 0.5 2.0
Goat cheese,
soft1 oz 28 6.0 4.1 1.4 0.2
Margarine,
vegetable oi l
spread 40%1 tbsp 14 5.4 1.3 1.7 2.2
Mayonnaise,
regular1 tbsp 14 10.3 1.6 2.3 6.2
Milk, skim 1 cup 244 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.0
Milk, whole,
3.25% f at1 cup 244 7.9 4.6 2.0 0.5
Oil, canola 1 tbsp 14 14.0 1.0 8.9 3.9
Oil, olive 1 tbsp 14 14.0 1.9 9.9 1.4
Oil, safflower ,
70% l inoleic1 tbsp 14 14.0 0.8 1.9 10.1
Oil, soybean 1 tbsp 14 14.0 2.1 3.1 7.9
Data from U.S. Department of Agricul ture, Agricul tural
Resear ch Service, Beltsville Human Nutrition Resear ch
Center . FoodData Centr al. Available from https:// fdc.nal
.usda .gov/.
571
FoodServing
sizeServing
size (g)Total
fat
(g)Saturated
fat (g)Mono-
unsaturated
fat (g)Poly-
unsaturated
fat (g)
Peanut but ter,
natural2 tbsp 32 16.5 3.3 8.3 4.1
Salmon, fi let,
wild, bak ed3 oz 85 6.9 1.1 2.3 2.8
Tuna, l ight,
canned in
water2 oz 56 0.5 0.1 0.1 0.1
Trout, fi let,
wild, bak ed3 oz 85 5.0 1.4 1.5 1.6
Walnuts,
dried, halv es1/4 cup 25 16.3 1.5 2.2 11.8
Yogurt, Gr eek,
plain, low -fat1 cup 245 4.7 3.0 1.2 0.2
Yogurt, plain,
low-fat1 cup 245 3.8 2.5 1.0 0.1
Data from U.S. Department of Agricul ture, Agricul tural
Resear ch Service, Beltsville Human Nutrition Resear ch
Center . FoodData Centr al. Available from https:// fdc.nal
.usda .gov/.
TABLE 10.12  Classification of LDL, Total, and HDL
Cholesterol
LDL cholesterol (mg/dl)
<100 Optimal
100-129 Near optimal/abo ve optimal
LDL = low -densi ty lipoprotein; HDL = high-densi ty lipoprotein.
Lipopr otein lev el testing should be completed after a 9- to 12-hour f ast.
LDL cholester ol is the primary tar get of ther apy.
Source: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute; National Institutes of Health; U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services,  Managing Blood Cholester ol in Adults:
Systematic Evidence Review from the Cholester ol Expert Panel, 2013 (U.S. Department of
Health and Human S ervices; National Heart, Lung, and B lood I nstitute, 2013).
572
LDL cholesterol (mg/dl)
130-159 Borderline high
160-189 High
>190 Very high
Total cholesterol (mg/dl)
<200 Desirable
200-239 Borderline high
>240 High
HDL cholesterol (mg/dl)
<40 Low
>60 High
LDL = low -densi ty lipoprotein; HDL = high-densi ty lipoprotein.
Lipopr otein lev el testing should be completed after a 9- to 12-hour f ast.
LDL cholester ol is the primary tar get of ther apy.
Source: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute; National Institutes of Health; U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services,  Managing Blood Cholester ol in Adults:
Systematic Evidence Review from the Cholester ol Expert Panel, 2013 (U.S. Department of
Health and Human S ervices; National Heart, Lung, and B lood I nstitute, 2013).
The human body has a sufficient amount of fat to fuel
long training sessions or competition.
Macronutrient Guidelines
Protein
Choose a variety of protein foods, from both animal and plant sources, which
include seafood, lean meat and poultry, eggs, beans, peas and lentils, soy
products, nuts, and seeds.
Increase the amount and variety of seafood consumed by choosing seafood
in place of some meat and poul try.
Choose nuts, seeds, and so y products in place of some meat and poul try.
Aerobic endur ance athletes should consume 1.2 to 2.0 grams of protein per
kilogram body weight per da y.
573
Strength athletes should consume 1.4 to 2.0 grams of protein per kilogram
body weight per da y.
Ingest 20 to 40 grams (0.25-0.40 g of protein per kg of body mass) of high-
quality protein ev ery 3 to 4 hours thr oughout the da y.
Carbohydrate
Reduce intak e of calories f rom added sugars.
Increase intake of vegetables (prepared without added salt or fat) and fruit
(prepared wi thout added sugars).
Eat a variety of vegetables, including beans; peas; starchy; and dark-green,
red, and or ange v egetables.
Consume at least half of all total grains as whole grains. Individuals who eat
refined gr ains should choose enriched gr ains.
Fats and Alcohol
Consume less than 10% of calories from saturated fats by replacing them
with unsatur ated f ats, particularly polyunsatur ated f ats.
If alcohol  is consumed, it should be consumed in moder ation—up to one
drink per day for women and two drinks per day for men— and only by adults
of legal drinking age. Pregnant women should avoid alcohol, and
breastfeeding women should be cautious about their intake if they choose to
drink and speak to their healthcare provider. Alcohol should be avoided in the
time period after ex ercise because i t reduces muscle pr otein synthesis (124).
574
Vitamins
Vitamins  are organic substances (i.e., containing carbon atoms )
needed in very small amounts to perform specific metabol ic
functions (71, 166). Vitamins typical ly act as coenzymes, facilitating
numer ous reactions in the body. For instance, B vitamins help the
body make energy from the metabol ism of carboh ydrates. Table
10.13  describ es the functions and some food sources of individual
vitamins.
TABLE 10.13  Vitamins
Vitamin FunctionFood sources
(Oregon State
University)DRI and ULb per
day
Vitamin A Necessary f or vision,
healthy skin, teeth,
body tissues, and
healthy mucous
membr anes and skinAnimal f oods including
animal l iver (veal, beef ,
goose, lamb , turk ey),
meat, f ortified mi lk,
cheese, herringMales: 300-900 mcg
RAE (r etinal activi ty
equiv alents) (RDA)
Females: 300-1,300
mcg RAE (RDA)
Males: 600-3,000
mcg RAE (UL)
Females: 600-3,000
mcg RAE (UL)
Beta car otene An antio xidanta;
converted into vi tamin
A in the bodySweet potato , carrots,
pumpkin, spinach,
collards, kale, winter
squash, lamb quarters,
beet gr eens, turnip
greens, cabbageNo RDA or AI;
howev er, 1 IU beta
carotene f rom food =
0.05 mcg RAE
vitamin A
UL is not
determinable due to
lack of data.
Supplementation is
advised only f or
individuals at risk f or
vitamin A deficiency .
Vitamin D Aids calcium
absorption, helps
maintain blood lev els
of calcium andFish (swor dfish, salmon,
tuna, sar dines,
mackerel, carp , eel,
whitefish), f ortified mi lk,Males: 15-20 mcg
(600-800 IU) (RDA)
Females: 15-20 mcg
(600-800 IU) (RDA)
575