# Section 10.4

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 10: Basic Nutritional Factors Affecting Health

**Section:** 10.4 -- Vitamins

**PDF Pages:** 576--590

Vitamin FunctionFood sources
(Oregon State
University)DRI and ULb per
day
phosphorus; necessary
for bui lding bone mass
and pr eventing bone
lossfortified br eakfast
cereals, egg y olksMales: 63-100 mcg
(2,500-4 ,000 IU)
(UL)
Females: 63-100 mcg
(2,500-4 ,000 IU)
(UL)
Vitamin E An antio xidanta;
needed f or immune
functioning and
metabol ismOils (wheat germ,
vegetable), f ortified
breakfast cer eals, nuts
and seeds, wheat germ,
peanut but ter, corn oi lMales: 6-15 mg (7 .5-
22.4 IU) (RDA)
Females: 6-19 mg
(9-28.4 IU) (RDA)
Males: 200-1,000 mg
(300-1,500 IU) (UL)
Females: 200-1,000
mg (300-1,500 IU)
(UL)
Vitamin K
(phylloquinone)Needed f or blood
clotting; supports
tissue and bone heal thDark gr een leaf y
vegetables (kale,
Brussels spr outs,
spinach, char d, turnip
and mustar d greens,
beet gr eens, r adicchio),
broccoli, aspar agus,
lamb quartersMales: 30-120 mcg
(AI)
Females: 30-90 mcg
(AI)
No UL due to lack of
data
Vitamin C Promotes heal thy cell
development, wound
healing, and r esistance
to infections. S erves as
an antio xidanta;
necessary f or
conversion of the
inactiv e form of f olic
acid to the activ e form;
makes iron available
for hemoglobin
synthesis.Sweet peppers,
peaches, gua va,
broccoli, kiwi fruit, citrus
fruit (strawberries,
oranges, l imes, lemons,
grapefruit, tangerine),
papayas, cantaloupe,
tomatoes, potatoes,
onionsMales: 15-90 mg
(RDA)
Females: 15-120 mg
(RDA)
Males: 400-2,000 mg
(UL)
Females: 400-2,000
mg (UL)
Thiamin (B 1) Coenzyme f or
carboh ydrate
metabol ism; needed
for normal f unctioningFortified br eakfast
cereals, sunflower
seeds, peas, pork,
oranges, or ange juice,Males: 0.5-1.2 mg
(RDA)
Females: 0.5-1.4 mg
(RDA)
576
Vitamin FunctionFood sources
(Oregon State
University)DRI and ULb per
day
of the nerv ous system
and muscles, including
the heartlima beans, pecans,
enriched riceNo UL due to lack of
data
Ribofla vin (B 2)Coenzyme in r ed blood
cell formation; nerv ous
system f unctioning;
and metabol ism of
carboh ydrate, pr otein,
and fat; needed f or
vision and ma y help
protect against
cataractsLiver, wheat germ,
brewer’s yeast,
almonds, cheese,
fortified br eakfast
cereal, whey pr otein,
milk, eggs, lamb , pork,
veal, beef , broccoli,
yogurtMales: 0.5-1.3 mg
(RDA)
Females: 0.5-1.6 mg
(RDA)
No UL due to lack of
data
Niacin Coenzyme f or
carboh ydrate, pr otein,
and fat metabol ism and
proper nerv ous system
functioning; high
intakes can lower
elevated cholester olSoy protein, so y flour ,
textur ed vegetable
protein, whey pr otein,
beef, peanuts, peanut
butter, sunflower seeds,
fortified br eakfast
cerealsMales: 6-16 mg
(RDA)
Females: 6-18 mg
(RDA)
Males: 10-35 mg
(UL)
Females: 10-35 mg
(UL)
Pyrido xine (B 6)Coenzyme f or protein
metabol ism and
nervous and immune
system f unction;
involved in synthesis of
hormones and r ed
blood cel lsLiver, bananas, f ortified
breakfast cer eals,
soybeans, chick en,
tuna, r aw carr ots, beef ,
broccoli, spinach,
potatoes, al falfa
sprouts, na vy beans,
peanut but ter, garbanz o
beans, w alnuts,
sunflower seeds,
avocados, eggs, l ima
beans, cabbage, salmonMales: 0.5-1. 7 mg
(RDA)
Females: 0.5-2.0 mg
(RDA)
Males: 30-100 mg
(UL)
Females: 30-100 mg
(UL)
Folate Needed f or normal
growth and
development and r ed
blood cel l formation;
reduces risk of neur al
tube birth def ects; ma y
reduce risk of heartBrewer’s yeast, f ortified
breakfast cer eals, l iver,
black-eyed peas, beans
(pinto , black, l ima,
white, garbanz o, soy),
peanuts, peanut but ter,
spinach, turnip gr eens,Males: 150-400 mcg
(RDA)
Females: 150-600
mcg (RDA)
Males: 300-1,000
mcg (UL)
577
Vitamin FunctionFood sources
(Oregon State
University)DRI and ULb per
day
disease and cervical
dysplasiaaspar agus, mustar d
greens, sea weed, eggs,
enriched br ead,
oranges, or ange juiceFemales: 300-1,000
mcg (UL)
Cobalamin
(B12)Vital for blood
formation and heal thy
nervous systemLiver, oysters, lamb ,
eggs, beef , shel lfish,
fish, poul try, pork,
chicken, fortified
breakfast cer ealsMales: 0.9-2.4 mcg
(RDA)
Females: 0.9-2.8
mcg (RDA)
No UL due to lack of
data
Biotin Assists in the
metabol ism of f atty
acids and use of B
vitaminsNuts (peanuts,
hazelnuts, almonds,
cashews, macadamia),
soybeans, peanut
butter, black -eyed peas,
liver, milk, egg y olks,
yeast, cheese,
cauliflower , carrots,
avocados, sweet
potatoesMales: 8-30 mcg (AI)
Females: 8-35 mcg
(AI)
No UL due to lack of
data
Pantothenic
acidAids in normal gr owth
and dev elopmentLiver, sunflower seeds,
fortified br eakfast
cereals, egg y olks,
whey pr otein, so y
protein, peanuts,
peanut but ter, pecans,
veal, enriched rice,
broccoli, lima beansMales: 2-5 mg (AI)
Females: 2-7 mg (AI)
No UL due to lack of
data
578
Vitamin FunctionFood sources
(Oregon State
University)DRI and ULb per
day
aAntioxidants are substances that modify cell-signal ing pathways and counter act oxidativ e
stress-induced cell damage caused by reactiv e oxygen and nitrogen species (free radicals).
Free radicals are both beneficial and harmf ul to human health. An overproduction of, or
overexposur e to, free radicals combin ed with a deficiency in antioxidants can result in
oxidativ e stress and subsequent damage to cel lular l ipids, pr oteins, and DNA (71, 166).
bDietary Reference Intake (DRI): A set of nutrient recommendations that include the values
Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA), Adequate Intake (AI), Estimated Average
Requirement (EAR) , and the Tolerable Upper Level Intake (UL). Tolerable Upper Level
Intake (UL): The highest daily intake of a nutrient that is likely to not pose a risk of
adverse health effects in most of the gener al population. DRIs and UL are listed as a range
across the l ife span f or each sex. DRI and UL v alues f rom (71-74).
Data f rom National I nstitutes of Heal th.
Water-soluble vitamins, including the B vitamins and vitamin C,
dissolv e in water and are transported in the blood. With the
exception of vitamin B12, which is stored in the liver for years, water-
soluble vitamins are not stored in appreciable amounts in the body;
instead the body uses what is needed and then excretes the
remaining amounts in urine (165). Though there are no known side
effects from excess vitamin B12 consumption, consuming more than
the body can use will not increase energy or improve health (18,
74). Vitamins A, D, E, and K are fat soluble and therefore carried by
fat in the blood and stored in fat tissue in the body (109). Excess
preformed vitamin A (not beta carotene, alpha carotene, or beta
crypto xanthin, which are converted into vitamin A in the body) is
toxic and associated with significant adverse effects including liver
damage, intracranial pressure (pseudotumor cerebri), dizziness,
nausea, headaches, skin irritation, pain in joints and bones, coma,
and even death (23). Excess vitamin A intake can occur through diet
but typical ly results from high levels of vitamin A in supplements (72,
109). Toxic levels of vitamin  D can lead to heart arrhythmias and
increased levels of blood calcium, which can cause blood vessel and
tissue calcification, as well as damage to the heart, blood vessels,
and kidneys (109). Vitamin E acts as an anticoagulant and therefore
579
thins the blood. Regular intake of excessiv e amounts of vitamin E
can lead to high serum vitamin E levels, which is associated with
increased risk of hemorrhagic stroke, particularly in individuals on
blood thinners  (125). Because vitamin K helps blood clot, excess
intake of this vitamin can interfere with the effects of some
anticlot ting medications such as w arfarin (Coumadin) (94).
Vitamin D is a particular vitamin of interest for both sedentary and
athletic individuals because it is important for immuni ty, protein
synthesis, muscle function, cardiovascular function, inflammatory
response, cell growth, and regulation of muscle and bone (39, 121).
Many people, including athletes, struggle to meet the
recommendations for vitamin D due to few foods being rich sources
of this vitamin (51). According to the Scientific Report of the 2020
Dietary Guidel ines Advisory Commi ttee, more than 90 percent of
men and women over 19 years of age do not consume enough
vitamin D (56, 154). Eating a diet containing seafood, and choosing
foods that are fortified with vitamin D, including milk, fortified soy
beverages, fortified soy yogurt, and some whole-gr ain cereals, can
help adults meet their needs for vitamin D. In addition to dietary
sources, the body can make vitamin D from the sun through sun
exposur e on the skin; howev er, populations living at higher latitudes
or who spend a lot of time indoors do not have enough sun
exposur e to meet vitamin D needs (51). As such, vitamin D
supplementation may be necessary for many individuals to prevent
deficiency . A meta- analysis of 11 randomiz ed control trials and 436
athletes showed that vitamin D supplementation only had a small or
trivial effect on upper and lower body muscular strength or power
(150). Despi te lack of a notable performance effect, adequate
vitamin D levels may be important for athletes to protect against
stress fractures and acute i llness (35, 39, 91).
580
Minerals
Minerals  contribute to the structur e of bone, teeth, and nails; are a
component of enzymes; and perform a wide variety of metabol ic
functions. For example, calcium is needed for bone and tooth
formation and function, nerve transmission, and muscle contraction.
Iron is necessary for oxygen transport and is also a component of
enzymes necessary for energy metabol ism. Calcium; phosphorus;
magnesium; iron; and the electrolytes  sodium, potassium, and
chloride are often called the major miner als. For the athlete,
miner als are important for bone health, oxygen-carryin g capaci ty,
and fluid and electr olyte balance. The miner als, their functions, and
good f ood sour ces ar e listed in table 10.14 .
TABLE 10.14  Minerals
Mineral Function Food sourcesDRI and
UL* per
day
Calcium Essential f or dev eloping and
maintaining heal thy bones
and teeth; assists wi th blood
clotting, muscle contr action,
and nerv e transmissionFruit juices and f ruit drinks
fortified wi th calcium, cheese,
sardines, mi lk, cot tage cheese,
yogurt, ice cr eam, calcium-set
tofu, turnip gr eens, Chinese
cabbage, mustar d greens, kale,
rutabagaMales:
700-1,300
mg (RDA)
Females:
700-1,300
mg (RDA)
Males:
2,000-
3,000 mg
(UL)
Females:
2,000-
*Dietary Reference Intake (DRI): A set of nutrient recommendations that include the
values Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA), Adequate Intake (AI), Estimated Average
Requirement (EAR) , and the Tolerable Upper Level Intake (UL). Tolerable Upper Level
Intake (UL): The highest daily intake of a nutrient that is likely to not pose a risk of
adverse health effects in most of the gener al population. DRIs and UL are listed as a range
across the l ife span f or each sex. DRI and UL v alues f rom (72, 73).
Data f rom National I nstitutes of Heal th.
581
Mineral Function Food sourcesDRI and
UL* per
day
3,000 mg
(UL)
Phosphorus Works wi th calcium to
develop and maintain str ong
bones and teeth; enhances
use of other nutrients;
essential f or ener gy
metabol ism, DNA structur e,
and cel l membr anesCheese, fish, beef , pork,
whole- wheat pr oducts, cocoa
powder , pumpkin seeds,
sunflower seeds, almondsMales:
460-1,250
mg (RDA)
Females:
460-1,250
mg (RDA)
Males: 3-4
g (UL)
Females:
3-4 g (UL)
Magnesium Activates nearly 100 enzymes
and helps nerv es and
muscles f unction; consti tuent
of bones and teethBran (wheat and rice), cocoa
powder , fortified br eakfast
cereals, seeds (pumpkin,
sunflower), so ybeans, nuts
(almonds, pine nuts, haz elnuts,
cashews, w alnuts, peanuts),
spinachMales: 80-
420 mg
(RDA)
Females:
80-400 mg
(RDA)
Males: 65-
350 mg
(UL)
Females:
65-350 mg
(UL)
Molybdenum Needed f or metabol ism of
DNA and ribonucleic acid
(RNA) and pr oduction of uric
acidMilk, mi lk products, peas,
beans, l iver, whole-gr ain
productsMales: 17-
45 mcg
(RDA)
Females:
17-50 mcg
(RDA)
Males:
300-2,000
*Dietary Reference Intake (DRI): A set of nutrient recommendations that include the
values Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA), Adequate Intake (AI), Estimated Average
Requirement (EAR) , and the Tolerable Upper Level Intake (UL). Tolerable Upper Level
Intake (UL): The highest daily intake of a nutrient that is likely to not pose a risk of
adverse health effects in most of the gener al population. DRIs and UL are listed as a range
across the l ife span f or each sex. DRI and UL v alues f rom (72, 73).
Data f rom National I nstitutes of Heal th.
582
Mineral Function Food sourcesDRI and
UL* per
day
mcg (UL)
Females:
300-2,000
mcg (UL)
Manganese Necessary f or the normal
development of the sk eletal
and connectiv e tissues;
involved in metabol ism of
carboh ydratesWheat germ, wheat br an, rice
bran, fortified br eakfast
cereals, rice cak es, nuts
(peanuts, pecans, pine nuts,
walnuts, almonds, haz elnuts),
soybeans, mussels, whole-
wheat pr oducts (pastas,
breads, and cr ackers)Males: 1.2-
2.3 mg
(AI)
Females:
1.2-2.6 mg
(AI)
Males: 2-
11 mg (UL)
Females:
2-11 mg
(UL)
Copper Involved in ir on metabol ism,
nervous system f unctioning,
bone heal th, and synthesis of
proteins; pla ys a r ole in the
pigmentation of skin, hair ,
and ey esLiver, shel lfish (especial ly
oysters), lobster , nuts
(cashews, B razil nuts,
hazelnuts, w alnuts, peanuts,
almonds, pecans, pistachios),
seeds (sunflower , pumpkin),
fortified br eakfast cer eals,
great northern beansMales:
340-900
mcg (RDA)
Females:
340-1,300
mcg (RDA)
Males:
1,000-
10,000
mcg (UL)
Females:
1,000-
10,000
mcg (UL)
*Dietary Reference Intake (DRI): A set of nutrient recommendations that include the
values Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA), Adequate Intake (AI), Estimated Average
Requirement (EAR) , and the Tolerable Upper Level Intake (UL). Tolerable Upper Level
Intake (UL): The highest daily intake of a nutrient that is likely to not pose a risk of
adverse health effects in most of the gener al population. DRIs and UL are listed as a range
across the l ife span f or each sex. DRI and UL v alues f rom (72, 73).
Data f rom National I nstitutes of Heal th.
583
Mineral Function Food sourcesDRI and
UL* per
day
Chromium Aids in glucose metabol ism
and ma y help r egulate blood
sugar and insul in lev els in
people wi th diabetesMushr ooms (whi te), raw
oysters, wine, apples, br ewer’s
yeast, beer , pork, chick enMales: 11-
35 mcg
(AI)
Females:
11-45 mcg
(AI)
No UL due
to lack of
data
Iodine Part of the th yroid hormone;
helps r egulate gr owth,
development, and ener gy
metabol ismIodized sal t, saltwater fish and
seafoodMales: 90-
150 mcg
(RDA)
Females:
90-290
mcg (RDA)
Males:
200-1,100
mcg (UL)
Females:
200-1,100
mcg (UL)
Iron Necessary f or red blood cel l
formation and f unction;
consti tuent of m yoglobin and
component of enzyme
systemsLiver, beef , lamb , pork, v eal,
poultry, clams, o ysters, f ortified
breakfast cer eals, enriched
bread pr oducts, br ewer’s yeast,
nuts (pine nuts, cashews,
almonds), beans (kidney ,
green, garbanz o)Males: 7-
11 mg
(RDA)
Females:
7-27 mg
(RDA)
Males: 40-
45 mg (UL)
Females:
40-45 mg
(UL)
*Dietary Reference Intake (DRI): A set of nutrient recommendations that include the
values Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA), Adequate Intake (AI), Estimated Average
Requirement (EAR) , and the Tolerable Upper Level Intake (UL). Tolerable Upper Level
Intake (UL): The highest daily intake of a nutrient that is likely to not pose a risk of
adverse health effects in most of the gener al population. DRIs and UL are listed as a range
across the l ife span f or each sex. DRI and UL v alues f rom (72, 73).
Data f rom National I nstitutes of Heal th.
584
Mineral Function Food sourcesDRI and
UL* per
day
Selenium Essential component of a k ey
antioxidant enzyme;
necessary f or normal gr owth
and dev elopment and f or use
of iodine in th yroid functionTenderloin of beef , pollock,
trout, tuna, o ysters, mack erel,
flounder , liver, sunflower seeds,
wheat br an, wheat germ, some
pork, f ortified br eakfast
cereals, per ch, cr ab, clams,
cod, haddock, whole- wheat
breadsMales: 20-
55 mcg
(RDA)
Females:
20-70 mcg
(RDA)
Males: 90-
400 mcg
(UL)
Females:
90-400
mcg (UL)
Zinc Essential part of mor e than
100 enzymes in volved in
digestion, metabol ism,
reproduction, and wound
healingOysters, beef , veal, lamb , pork,
chicken, lima beans, black -
eyed peas, whi te beansMales: 3-
11 mg
(RDA)
Females:
3-13 mg
(RDA)
Males: 7-
40 mg (UL)
Females:
7-40 mg
(UL)
*Dietary Reference Intake (DRI): A set of nutrient recommendations that include the
values Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA), Adequate Intake (AI), Estimated Average
Requirement (EAR) , and the Tolerable Upper Level Intake (UL). Tolerable Upper Level
Intake (UL): The highest daily intake of a nutrient that is likely to not pose a risk of
adverse health effects in most of the gener al population. DRIs and UL are listed as a range
across the l ife span f or each sex. DRI and UL v alues f rom (72, 73).
Data f rom National I nstitutes of Heal th.
Two miner als, iron and calcium, deserv e additional attention.
Athletes who do not consum e enough dietary iron can develop iron
deficiency or iron deficiency anemia , both of which can impair
performance. Inadequate dietary calcium can contribute to low bone
density and possibly future risk of developing osteopenia or
osteopor osis.
585
Iron
Iron is essential for both the functioning and synthesis of
hemoglobin, a protein that transfers oxygen throughout the body
(158). In addition, iron is a component of the protein myoglobin,
which transports oxygen to muscles (63). This miner al plays
important roles in growth, development, cell functioning, and the
synthesis and f unctioning of some hormones (30, 160).
Iron deficiency and iron deficiency anemia is a major public health
concern worldwide, mainly affecting women and children (40).
Though it disproportionately affects those in developing countries, it
is common in industrial ized countries as well. The National Health
and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) from 2015-16 found
that approximately 11% of American females aged 12 to 49 had iron
deficiency , with the goal to reduce that level to 7.2% (99). (In
studies examin ing iron deficiency in female athletes, more than 25%
tested positive for iron deficiency [65, 102].) Iron deficiency occurs
in three stages (in order of severity): depletion, marginal deficiency ,
and anemia (90, 117). Iron carries oxygen to the working muscles,
and even marginal iron deficiency may impair athletic performance
(19, 63). Iron deficiency anemia develops when low iron stores
persist for a period of time and the body cannot make enough
healthy red blood cells to deliver oxygen throughout the body (158).
Symptoms depend on the individual; some people are asymptomatic
or get used to their symptoms and assume that they are normal.
Symptoms of iron deficiency  or iron deficiency anemia may include
weakness, fatigue, irritability, poor concentr ation, headache,
decreased exercise capaci ty, hair loss, and dry mouth (15). Other
symptoms associated with iron deficiency anemia include feeling cold
often, inflamed tongue (glossi tis), shortness of breath during routine
activities, and pica (the desire to eat nonfood substances such as
laundry starch, dirt, clay, and ice) (52). Iron deficiency has also been
shown to negativ ely affect mental health and contribute to
depression (30, 99).
586
Women of childbearing age, teenage girls, pregnant women,
infants, and toddlers have the greatest need for iron and therefore
an increased risk of becoming deficient. In addition, distance
runners, vegetarian athletes, female athletes, those who lose a
significant amount of blood during their menstrual cycle, people who
take excessiv e amounts of antacids, and people with certain
digestiv e diseases such as celiac disease have an increased risk of
developing ir on deficiency anemia (72).
The two types of iron found in food are heme and nonhe me iron.
Heme iron, derived from hemoglobin, is found in foods that original ly
contained hemoglobin and myoglobin— animal foods including red
meats, fish, and poultry. Heme iron is absorbed better than
nonheme iron, and absorption is not affected by anything else we
eat. Approximately 15% to 35% of the heme iron consumed is
actual ly absorbed (112).
Nonheme iron is the form of iron found in all other, non-meat
foods including vegetables, grains, and iron-fortified breakfast
cereal. Only 2% to 20% of nonheme iron is absorbed (160). While
heme iron is not affected by compounds found in food eaten
concurr ently, many factors affect the absorption of nonheme iron.
For instance, the nonheme iron in spinach is bound to a substance
called phytic acid, the storage form of phosphorus in plants. Phytic
acid decreases  the absorption of nonheme iron. In addition, several
other substances may decrease the absorption of nonheme iron,
including tannins (found in tea and wine), calcium (found in dairy
and multivitamins), polyphenols, phytates (found in legumes and
whole grains),  and some of the proteins in soy. A person can
increase the amount of nonheme iron absorbed by consuming
vitamin C–rich foods or beverages at the same time or consuming a
nonheme source at the same time heme iron is consumed. For
example, pairing spinach with meat increases iron absorption from
spinach (72, 160).
There are many supplemental forms of iron; each supplies a
different amount of elemental iron while also varying in
587
bioavailability and the potential for side effects such as stomach
upset (103, 157). Ferrous iron has a high bioavailability and is most
recommended; it is often paired with vitamin C, which enhances iron
absorption (157). It is recommended to take iron supplements on an
empty stomach, at least an hour before meals, because many foods,
drinks, and other dietary supplements can interfere with iron
absorption. For example, whole grains, coffee, black tea, red wine,
and hot chocolate can impair iron absorption. Additional ly, both
calcium and supplemental magnesium may interfere with iron
absorption (169). Because of the many factors affecting iron intake
and absorption, including intake of other miner als the athlete may
not be consum ing in adequate quanti ties, only a medical doctor or
register ed dietitian should recommend iron supplements and how to
take an iron supplement for maximum absorption and minimal
stomach upset (157).
Calcium
Adequate calcium intake throughout childhood and adolescence is
essential for the development of strong bones. Calcium  helps bones
grow in length and density during adolescence, with up to 90% of
peak bone miner al density occurring during late adolescence (61). In
adults, calcium helps maintain bone density. When dietary calcium
intake falls short, calcium is pulled from its storage site in bone to
meet the demands of the body and keep calcium concentr ations in
the blood, muscle, and intercellular fluids constant. Calcium is
essential for attaining peak bone mass, and calcium deficiencies can
impair the attainment of peak bone miner al density and increase risk
of fracture later in life (109). Calcium also keeps teeth strong, helps
regulate muscle contraction, and plays a role in nerve functioning,
blood vessel expansion and contraction, and hormone and enzyme
secretion (109).
The NHANES found that just 15% of 9- to 13-year-old females
and less than 10% of females aged 14 to 18 and over the age of 51
met the adequate intake (AI) for calcium from diet alone (11).
588
Therefore, athletes should be encour aged to include dairy products
and other calcium-rich foods in their diets. The athlete’ s medical
doctor or register ed dietitian may suggest a calcium supplement if
calcium needs cannot be met thr ough diet alone.
Caloric Versus Nutrient-Dense Foods
Given the rise in obesity in America, some classify the American diet as calorie
dense but nutrient poor. The Scientific Report of the 2020 Dietary Guidel ines
Advisory Commi ttee recommends a dietary pattern including a variety of nutrient -
dense foods. Though there is no standar dized defini tion of the term nutrient
density , in gener al, choosin g nutrient -dense foods means looking for foods based
on the nutrients such as vitamins, minerals, and fiber, as well as the healthy plant-
based compounds that they provide, whereas caloric density refers to the caloric
content of a food. Foods high in nutrie nt density include milk, vegetables, protein
foods, and grains, while foods high in caloric density but low in nutrient density
typical ly include potato chips, desserts, and candy (44). For more information on
nutrient versus caloric density, the reader is referred to the work of Drewnowski
(44).
589
Fluid and Electrolytes
Water is the largest component of the body, representing 45% to
75% of a person’ s body weight (75). In the human body, water acts
as a lubricant, shock absorber , building material, and solvent.
Additional ly, water is essential for body temper ature regulation
(water loss through sweat helps cool off skin, particularly in hot
environments and during exercise), nutrient transport and waste
product removal, and maintaining fluid balance and therefore normal
blood pressure (81). Water is so important that even under optimal
temper ature condi tions, the body can surviv e only a few days
without w ater.
While maintaining adequate hydration  is important for all
individuals, athletes must pay close attention to their hydration
status since sweat losses that exceed fluid intake can quickly lead to
a hypohydrated state with a subsequent increase in core body
temper ature, decrease in blood plasma volume, and increase in
heart rate and perceived exertion (32, 139). When this happens,
sweat output cannot keep up with increases in core body
temper ature unless fluids are given. Repeated exercise in hot
environments helps the body adapt to heat stress (e.g., greater
sweat volume, lower electr olyte concentr ation of sweat, and lower
temper ature for the onset of sweating), and therefore athletes may
be more prone to dehydration  and heat stress at the begin ning of
the season (54). In addition, athletes with less training may be more
prone to heat stress than trained athletes (32). Due to physiological
changes that alter water conserv ation in the body as well as age-
related decline in fluid intake, the elderly have an increased risk of
dehydration and hypohydration  (32). Children may have a greater
risk of dehydration as well, resulting from increased heat gain from
the environment due to greater surface area–body mass ratio
compar ed to adults, increased heat production during  exercise,
decreased ability to dissipate heat through sweat, and a decreased
sensation of thirst compar ed to adults (12, 46). Additional ly, those
590