# Section 11.1

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 11: Nutrition Strategies for Maximizing Performance

**Section:** 11.1 -- Precompetition Nutrition

**PDF Pages:** 613--625

CHAPTER  11
NUTRITION STRATEGIES FOR
MAXIMIZING PERFORMANCE
Shawn M. Arent, PhD, and Abbie E. Smith-Ryan, PhD
The authors would l ike to acknowledge the signi ficant contribution of Marie Spano to this chapter .
After completing this chapter, you will be able to
list pre-, during-, and postcompeti tion nutri tion recommendations f or
different sports;
understand nutri tion guidel ines f or aer obic ex ercise perf ormance and
recovery;
understand nutri tion recommendations f or str ength and h ypertr ophy;
provide guidel ines f or weight gain and weight loss;
identi fy hydration r ecommendations;
recogniz e signs and symptoms of r elative ener gy deficiency syndr ome
(RED- S) and eating disor ders;
understand the importance of ha ving an interv ention and r eferral system in
place f or athletes suspected of ha ving an eating disor der;
recogniz e the pr evalence and etiologies of obesi ty; and
assist in the assessment pr ocess f or obese individuals.
What athletes eat and drink before and during competi tion can affect their
performance, while their postev ent meal has a greater impact on their recovery
and, if the time period between events is less than 24 hours, performance in the
next event or game. Therefore, this chapter focuses on pre-, during-, and
postcompeti tion nutrition while also providing guidel ines for athletes who want to
lose or gain weight. Additionally, no talk about weight is complete unless it
includes information on disordered eating and eating disorders. It is imper ative
that the strength and condi tioning professional recogniz e when an athlete may
613
have signs and symptoms of an eating disorder and be an active member of the
treatment team.
614
Precompetition, During-Event, and
Postcompetition Nutrition
Athletes’ dietary practices over time will influence their overall health and
performance. Additional ly, what athletes eat before and during competi tion can
have both physiological and psychological effects on performance, while their
postcompeti tion meal affects recovery and may therefore influence how they
perform during their next bout of tr aining or competi tion.
Precompetition Nutrition
The precompetition meal  helps provide fluid to mainta in adequate hydration,
carboh ydrate to maximiz e blood glucose and stored glycogen levels, and protein
to reduce muscle soreness (7, 31). Glycogen is the main form of energy used
during high-intensi ty (>70% V̇O2max) exercise; once these stores become
depleted, the athlete will experience muscular fatigue (60). Small quanti ties of
glycogen are stored in liver and muscle, totaling approximately 15 grams of
glycogen per kilogram body weight (3). For example, an 80 kilogram (176 lb)
man can store approximately  1,200 grams of glycogen. Glycogen stored in the
liver is used for the whole body, while glycogen stored in muscle tissue is used
by muscle (60).
Despi te the vital roles that both hydration and glycogen play in athletic
performance, studies examining the importance of the precompeti tion meal and
its effect on performance are equiv ocal due to differences in study subjects and
methods used.  Some show that a high-carboh ydrate preexercise meal enhances
aerobic time to exhaustion (29, 98) as well as anaer obic performance in
adolescent males (75), while no effect on time trial performance has been
reported in the literature (105). Despi te these differences and the fact that
studies simulating performance cannot take into account several factors that
distinguish the competi tive environment from a lab setting, such as
precompeti tion nerves, temper ature, humidi ty, and altitude, athletes can adapt
gener al precompeti tion guidel ines based on the literature to fit their own unique
needs and the competi tive environment they are in. Importantly , an
individual ized precompeti tion meal should be consumed.
All precompeti tion meals should take timing, meal and fluid composi tion,
event or sport, and individual athlete preferences into account. In order to
minimiz e the potential for stomach upset, smaller quanti ties of fluids and food
should be consumed when the precompeti tion meal is consumed closer in
tempor al proximity to competi tion. Precompeti tion foods and beverages should
be familiar to the athlete (i.e., tried in practice), low in fat and fiber so that they
615
empty rapidly from the stomach and minimiz e any potential for gastrointestinal
distress, and moder ate in protein (protein promotes longer -lasting satiet y and
accelerates r ecovery) (7).
Athletes can choose from either high or low glycemic index (131) (see chapter
10 for more details) carboh ydrates before competi tion based on individual
preference or tolerance and fiber content; resear ch does not indicate that one is
more advantageous than the other (15). Even though consuming carboh ydrates
that rapidly increase insulin, such as glucose, will lead to an initial drop in blood
sugar at the beginning of exercise, blood sugar levels typically return to normal
within approximately 20 minutes, and the initial drop has no negativ e effect on
performance (82).
Minimizing Gastrointestinal Issues
To minimiz e the likelihood of stomach discomf ort during competi tion, athletes should do the
following:
Try food in practice first. Always try new foods during several practice sessions before
competi tion (7).
When the meal is closer in time to the start of the game or event, consume smaller amounts
of food and l iquids.
Avoid high-f at and high-fiber foods. Both fat and fiber slow down the rate of digestion. When
food is still being digested as an athlet e exercises, he or she may experience stomach cramps
(7).
Avoid sugar alcohols. Despi te their name, sugar alcohols contain no alcohol, but their
chemical structur e resembles that of both sugar and alcohol. Sugar alcoho ls are a type of
carboh ydrate that is not completely absorbed in the gut. Consequently , consumption can
cause gas, bloating, and cramping and may have a laxativ e effect. Sugar alcohols are found in
some low-carboh ydrate and sugar -free products, including sugar -free gum, toothpaste, and
energy drinks. The two sugar alcohols most likely to cause gastrointestinal issues are sorbitol
and mannitol (4). Any product that could result in consumption of 20 grams of manni tol must
carry this warning on the label: “Excess consumption may have a laxativ e effect.” Individual
responses to sugar alcohol vary. Sugar  alcohols include xylitol (the most common one found
in dental products) , erythri tol, sorbitol, manni tol, maltitol, isomal t, lactitol, hydrogenated
starch hydrolysates, and h ydrogenated glucose syrups (4).
Aerobic Endurance Sports
The precompet ition meal may be most important for aerobic endur ance athletes
who compete in long-dur ation activity (>2 h) in the morning after an overnight
fast. Upon waking in the morning, blood sugar levels are low and liver glycogen
stores are substantial ly reduced. Both condi tions decrease the amount of
carboh ydrate available for use as energy. Carboh ydrates at the precompeti tion
meal can significantly enhance glycogen stores and improve exercise time to
616
exhaustion in those who regularly include carboh ydrate in their diets, when
consumed 3 or mor e hours bef ore competi tion (33, 146).
A crossover study examine d whether a precompeti tion high-carboh ydrate
meal combined with a carboh ydrate-electr olyte sports drink consumed during
exercise improved aerobic endur ance running capaci ty (70% V̇O2max until
exhaustion) more than the sports drink alone (28). The scientists had men
perform three treadmi ll runs, each separ ated by one week, after an overnight
fast followed by a carboh ydrate meal 3 hours before exercise in addition to a
carboh ydrate-electr olyte sports drink during running; a carboh ydrate meal 3
hours before exercise and water during running; or a low-calorie placebo drink
(same flavor as the sport drink) 3 hours before exercise and water during
running. They replicated the same diet for the two-da y period before each trial.
No differences were noted in average daily caloric intake between the three
trials. Consumption of the high-carboh ydrate preexercise meal improved aerobic
endur ance running capaci ty by 9% compar ed to the placebo drink before
exercise and water during the run. Howev er, the high-carboh ydrate meal plus
sport drink during the run improved aerobic endur ance capaci ty by 22%
compar ed to the placebo beforehand and sport drink during the run. These
results indicate that a high-carboh ydrate preexercise or precompeti tion meal can
help impr ove aerobic endur ance running capaci ty (28).
Aerobic endur ance athletes who are not chronical ly adapted to a low-
carboh ydrate diet and start exercise with depleted glycogen stores will break
down muscle to use amino acids for energy and may acutely suppr ess immune
and central nervous system functioning. Therefore, a high-carboh ydrate
preexercise meal can help attenuate the breakdown of skeletal muscle while also
providing carbohydrate for immune and nervous system  functioning (23, 76).
Over time, adaptation to chronic consumption of a low-carboh ydrate diet
increases the body’s reliance on its vast storage of fat as a fuel source during
exercise, though training with low glycogen stores may suppr ess immune and
central nervous system functioning (23, 53). In a study examining protein
catabol ism, six subjects rode a cycle ergometer for 1 hour at 61% V̇O2max after
a carbohydrate loading  protocol or carboh ydrate depletion. In the
carboh ydrate-depleted state, protein breakdown was calculated at 13.7 grams
per hour , which r epresented 10. 7% of the calories used during ex ercise (76).
It is clear that a preexercise meal consumed hours before competi tion can
help improve aerobic endur ance performance. Howev er, extremely early morning
start times can compl icate the desire to feed with a concurr ent desire for
maximum sleep. For instance, a runner who must be at the starting line of a race
at 7:00 a.m. may find that waking up at 3:00 or 4:00 a.m. to eat is not practical.
Athletes who find themselv es in this scenario should practice eating small
617
amounts of food 1 to 2 hours before they start, transitioning to easily digestible
carboh ydrates and liquid carboh ydrates before competi tion, while also ensuring
that they consume an adequate amount of carboh ydrate during competi tion.
The following are gener al recommendations that can be adapted to meet each
athlete’ s individ ual needs. More resear ch needs to be done to examine the needs
of athletes in a variety of sports and to determine the effects of varying amounts
of each macronutrient on performance (100). Until this is done, the guidel ines
for aerobic endur ance athletes are adapted to other sports. This information
should also be appl ied to str ength, power , and team or field sport athletes.
Preexercise feeding may be more important than postex ercise feeding if an
athlete is underf ueled. Female athletes may see greater benefi ts from their
training when nutrients are consumed before exercise compared to after
exercise on str ength and lean mass adaptations (111).
Athletes should  prehydrate, if necessary , several hours before exercise to
allow for fluid absorption and urine output. Their urine specific gravity
(USG) r eading should be <1.02 (120).
Athletes who tend to get nauseated easily, who have experienced diarrhea
during competi tion, who get anxious or experience precompeti tion jitters,
or who compe te in high-intensi ty sports (jarring movements can increase
the likelihood of stomach upset), as well as those who are competing in
the heat, may want to consider eating at least 4 hours before competi tion,
as well as trying a variety of types of low-fiber carbo hydrate options.
Aerobic endur ance athletes who eat at least 4 hours before competi tion
should include approximately 1 to 4 grams of carboh ydrate per kilogram
body weight and 0.15 to 0.25 grams of protein per kilogram body weight
(131).
If the precomp etition meal is consumed 2 hours before exercise, athletes
should aim for approximately  1 gram of carboh ydrate per kilogram body
weight. Athletes should follow an individual ized hydration plan. During
prolonged activity in hot weather , they should consume a sport drink
containing 20 to 30 mEq of sodium (460-690 mg with chloride as the
anion) per liter, 2 to 5 mEq of potassium (78-195 mg) per liter, and
carboh ydrate in a concentr ation of 5% to 10% (120).
When consume d closer to the start of competi tion, the preexercise meal
should be smaller. Additionally, liquid sources of carboh ydrate may be
preferable when the preexercise meal is 1 hour before the event because
they are emptied from the stomach faster than solid food (7). Gels,
gummies, and similar sources of carboh ydrate are also digested very
quickly . Table 11.1 summariz es these recomm endations while providing
sample f ood options.
618
TABLE 11.1  Precompetition Food and Fluid Recommendations
for Aerobic Endurance Athletes
Time before
competitionFood
recommendationsFluid
recommendationsSample
precompetition
meals for a 68
kg (150 lb)
athleteSample meals based on
food and fluid
recommendations
1 h 0.5 g carboh ydrate
per ki logram body
weight34 g
carboh ydrate1 smal l
banana
8 fl oz
(237 mL)
sport
drink37 g
carboh ydrate
8 fl oz (237
mL) fluid
2 h 1 g carboh ydrate
per ki logram body
weightIf not adequately
hydrated, sip on 3-5
mL (0.10-0.17 fl oz)
of fluid per ki logram
body weight (120)68 g
carboh ydrate
7-12 fl oz (207-
355 mL) fluid2.5 cups
(525 g)
boiled,
plain
potato ,
flesh only
2 mini
bagels
with 1
tbsp (20
g) jam
8 fl oz
(237 mL)
sport
drink66 g
carboh ydrate
72 g
carboh ydrate
8 g pr otein
8 fl oz (237
mL) fluid
4 h or mor e1-4 g carboh ydrate
per ki logram body
weight
0.15-0.25 g pr otein
per ki logram body
weight (105)Should consume
approximately 5-7
mL (0.17-0.24 fl oz)
of water or a sport
drink per ki logram
body weight (120)68-273 g
carboh ydrate
10-17 g pr otein
Minimal f atBowl of
cereal
and fruit
(8 fl oz
[237 mL]
skim
milk, 2
cups [55
g]
Cheerios,
1/4 cup
[40 g]
unpack ed
raisins)74 g
carboh ydrate
11 g pr otein
14 fl oz (414
mL) w ater
Egg
white
sandwich
(2 egg
whites, 2
pieces of72 g
carboh ydrate
(based on 1
slice = 64 g
weight)
17 g pr otein
Note:  These r ecommendations can be adapted f or other t ypes of athletes.
619
Time before
competitionFood
recommendationsFluid
recommendationsSample
precompetition
meals for a 68
kg (150 lb)
athleteSample meals based on
food and fluid
recommendations
white
bread)
(skip
high-
fiber
breads
before
workout)14 fl oz (414
mL) w ater
Note:  These r ecommendations can be adapted f or other t ypes of athletes.
Athletes may want to keep a record of their food intake, including the time
each meal or snack was consumed and how they felt while training. By recording
the types and amounts of food consumed and when these are consumed in
relation to training, athletes may be able to identi fy any issues they are having
with performance or stomach upset and develop a better precompeti tion plan.
Carboh ydrate foods that are high in fructose, sorbitol, and fermentable
oligosac charides, disaccharid es, monosac charides, and polyols (FODMAPs) may
increase the risk of gastrointestinal distress when consumed before exercise.
Selecting foods that are lower FODMAP and lower fructose may minimiz e the
likelihood of gastr ointestinal issues.
The primary  purpose of the precompetition meal is to provide
sufficient fluid to maintain hydration and carbohydrate to
maximize blood glucose and stored glycogen while also satisfying
hunger.
Carbohydrate Loading
Depletion of muscle and liver glycogen leads to fatigue during long-term aerobic
endur ance exercise (117, 129, 141). Therefore, a technique called carboh ydrate
loading  has been used for decades to enhance muscle glycogen  before aerobic
endur ance events. Although there are many different variations of carboh ydrate
loading, all include high carboh ydrate intake in the days leading up to an event
to maximize glycogen stores and therefore carboh ydrate availability in the later
stages of the event (32). Carboh ydrate loading offers potential benefi ts for
athletes training and compe ting for more than 90 minutes, such as distance
runners, road cyclists, cross-country skiers, and other aerobic endur ance athletes
who risk depleting glycogen stores, and it may conceiv ably benefi t other athletes
as wel l (112).
620
A comm only used carboh ydrate loading regimen includes three days of a high-
carboh ydrate diet in concert with tapering exercise the week before competi tion
and complete rest the day before the event. The diet should provide adequate
calories and carboh ydrate per day: 8 to 10 grams of carboh ydrate per kilogram
body weight. This regimen should increase muscle glycogen stores 20% to 40%
above normal (32). Howev er, higher intakes, 10 to 12 grams of carboh ydrate per
kilogram body weight, have been suggested for runners during the 36 to 48
hours bef ore a mar athon (22).
Studies show that carboh ydrate loading is effective in men (129). Howev er,
the studies in women have been mixed. One study examined the effects of
carboh ydrate loading on aerobic endur ance performance  and substr ate use in
eight 20- to 40-year-old weight -stable, eumenorrheic female runners with an
average runnin g history of 53 kilometers (33 miles) per week for at least 12
months before the study and a typical carboh ydrate intake below 65% of total
caloric intake (9). Each female completed three different 24.2-kilometer (15-
mile) self-paced treadmi ll performance runs after four days on each experimental
diet regimen: carboh ydrate supplementation (50% of calories from
carboh ydrate), carboh ydrate loading and supplementation (75% of calories from
carboh ydrate), and placebo (50% of calories from carbohydrate). Both the
carboh ydrate-supplemented and carboh ydrate loading plus supplementation
groups consumed a 6% carboh ydrate-electr olyte solution before exercise (6
mL/kg of body weight) and every 20 minutes during exercise (3 mL/kg of body
weight). And though the carboh ydrate-supplemented and carboh ydrate loading
plus supplemen tation groups used a greater portion of energy from carboh ydrate
during their runs, there was no significant difference in running performance
between the groups. Howev er, both total calories and grams of carboh ydrate per
day were not reported; therefore, it is possible that total calorie or carboh ydrate
intakes (or both) were not adequate for the runners. Additionally, given the small
number of subjects included in this study, differences in performance may have
been noted i f mor e subjects had been included (9).
In another study, resear chers found that males increased glycogen content
significantly while female athletes did not after increasing carboh ydrate intake
from 58% to 74% of calories for four days before a submaximal aerobic
endur ance exercise test, due to either inadequate carboh ydrate or calorie intake
(or both) or sex differences in glycogen storage (129). In a follow-up study, the
same resear chers examined glycogen storage capaci ty in six well-trained men
and six well-trained women (132). Subjects were random ly assigned to one of
three diets for four days: a high-carboh ydrate diet (75% of total calorie intake),
a high-c arboh ydrate diet plus extra calories (75% of calories from carboh ydrate
and a 34% increase in total calories), or their habitual daily diet. In men, both
621
the higher-carboh ydrate diet and higher -carboh ydrate plus extra calories diet led
to significantly  greater levels of glycogen than the habitual diet. Howev er, in
women, only the higher -carboh ydrate plus extra calories diet resulted in
significant increases in glycogen storage compar ed to the habitual diet. In the
high-carboh ydrate condi tions, men increased their total carboh ydrate intake to
7.9 grams of carboh ydrate per kilogram body weight, whereas women reached
just 6.4 grams of carboh ydrate per kilogram body weight. No differences were
noted between  men and women in their ability to use glycogen as measur ed by
enzymatic activity. Therefore, the failure of previous studies to show improved
performance from carboh ydrate loading in women was likely due to inadequate
overall carboh ydrate intake (132). This theory (that women were not consuming
enough total carboh ydrate in many of the protocols) was backed up in a study
examining female cyclists. In trained female cyclists, three or four days on a
moder ate-carboh ydrate diet (48% of calories from carboh ydrates) followed by
three or four days consuming 78% of calories from carboh ydrates (8.14 g of
carboh ydrate per kilogram body weight) led to significant increases in glycogen
stores and greater cycling time to exhaustion compar ed to seven days on the
moder ate-carboh ydrate diet (142). Resear chers have found that glycogen
storage capaci ty in the 4-hou r time period after exercise did not differ between
men and women when they consumed the same amount of carboh ydrate per
unit body weight (1 g of carboh ydrate per kilogram body weight immediately and
1 hour after the completion of exercise) (130). And while glycogen storage
capaci ty is greater during the luteal phase of the menstr ual cycle in women as
compar ed to the early follicular phase due to hormonal differences, carboh ydrate
loading and incr eased carboh ydrate intak e can mak e up f or this di fference (99).
The main challenge with carboh ydrate loading in females  appears to be their
overall daily calorie intake. Women who habitually consume less than 2,400
calories per day may find it difficult to consume greater amounts of
carboh ydrate. Therefore, female athletes may need to increase their total energy
intake above 2,400 calories, in addition to consuming a higher -carboh ydrate diet,
in order to incr ease gly cogen stor es (129, 142).
Though the majori ty of studies on carboh ydrate loading have been done in
aerobic endur ance athletes, some resear ch has attempted to examine
carboh ydrate loading for athletes in high-intensi ty sports as well. In a
randomiz ed, crossover design, seven professional soccer players who consumed
an average of 46% of calori es from carboh ydrates ate either a 39% or a 65%
carboh ydrate diet two days before being testing. Each test consisted of 6,858
meters (7,500 yd) of field work (completed at 65%, 57%, and 81% V̇O2max)
followed by a treadmi ll run to exhaustion in an attempt to mimic a soccer game.
After the high-carboh ydrate diet, the players ran 17.1 kilometers (10.6 miles)
622
total, which was 0.9 kilomete rs (0.6 miles) longer (a significant difference) than
the distance run while on the lower -carboh ydrate diet. Howev er, three of the
athletes ran less than 420 meters (459 yd) longer , indicatin g significant variabi lity
in the athletes’ responses to a higher -carboh ydrate regimen (14). The results of
this study may or may not be applicable to soccer players, since the average
distance covered in a soccer match is consider ably shorter (10.3 km [6.4 miles]
with a range of 9.7 to 11.3 km [6.0-7 .0 miles], as reported in one study), and it
is covered in an intermi ttent manner and at v arying lev els of intensi ty (72).
In a study examining the effect of carboh ydrate loading on resistance exercise
performance, eight healthy young men were randomly assigned to either a
higher -carboh ydrate (6.5 g of carboh ydrate per kilogram body weight) or a
moder ate-carboh ydrate diet (4.4 g of carboh ydrate per kilogram body weight) for
four days. After this period, they participated in a resistance exercise test
including 4 sets of 12 repetitions of maximal-ef fort jump squats with a load of
30% of a 1-repetition maxim um (1RM) and a 2-minute rest period between sets
(52). There was no significant difference in power performance between subjects
on the high-carboh ydrate and the moder ate-carboh ydrate diets. Therefore, in
this study a higher -carboh ydrate diet did not enhance power performance during
a 4-set resistance exercise test. Howev er, it is unclear whether the carboh ydrate
loading regimen could have affected power performance if more sets were
performed or if the carboh ydrate loading regimen more closely resembled that of
an aerobic endur ance athlete, providing 8 to 10 grams carbohydrate per kilogram
body weight (52).
The degree of benefi t derived from carboh ydrate loading varies between
individuals, even between aerobic endur ance athletes, and therefore athletes
should determ ine the value of this regimen while weighing any negativ e side
effects, such as tempor ary weight gain, in practice before competi tion. Athletes
who use carboh ydrate loading as a means to maximiz e glycogen storage should
also know how different types of carboh ydrates affect them. For instance,
oligosac charides, which are found in dry beans and peas, onions, and foods with
added inulin or other oligosac charides (such as some nutrition bars and shakes),
are rapidly fermented by bacteria in the gut, which can lead to excessiv e
intestinal gas and bloating. Dietary fiber is found in vegetables, fruits, whole
grains, dry beans and peas, nuts, and seeds (140). Table 11.2 provides a sample
daily meal plan for a 68-kilogram (150-pound) athlete following resear ch-based
carboh ydrate recommendations f or aer obic endur ance athletes.
Carbohydrate loading is an effective strategy to maximize glycogen
storage. How ever, athle tes must consume 8 to 10 grams of
623
carbohydrate per kilogram body weight per day during the loading
period to notice any benefit from carbohydrate loading.
During-Event Nutrition
Nutrition is an important factor during aerobic endur ance events lasting greater
than 45 minutes, intermi ttent-activity sports, or when an athlete has multiple
events in one day. Fluids and carboh ydrates can directly affect performance.
Amino acid oxidation, primari ly the branched chain amino acids, are oxidized
during sustained aerobic endur ance exercise, providing substr ate for
gluconeogenesis. Easily digestible proteins can minimiz e muscle damage and
substr ate depletion (116).
Proper hydration during competi tion is essential for performance while also
helping to prevent overheating, dehydration, and heat illness. Athletes should
hydrate several hours before exercise to allow for fluid absorption and urine
output before competing. Additional ly, they should consum e enough fluid during
exercise to prevent water weight losses exceeding 2% of body weight (120). The
optimal sport drink contains 20 to 30 mEq of sodium (460-690 mg with chloride
as the anion) per liter, 2 to 5 mEq of potassium (78-1 95 mg) per liter, and
carboh ydrate in a concentr ation of 5% to 10% (2). Sport drinks with a higher
concentr ation of carboh ydrate—those that contain more than 8%—dela y gastric
emptying (how quickly the drink is emptied from the stomach), which could lead
to stomach discomf ort (87). Therefore, a carboh ydrate concentr ation of 6% to
8% ma y be ideal (120).
TABLE 11.2  Carbohydrate Loading Regimens and Sample
Daily Meal Plans for Aerobic Endurance Athletes
Amount of carbohydrateSample meal plan for a 68 kg (150 lb)
athlete Nutrition breakdown
8-10 g carboh ydrate per
kilogram body weight consumed
on da y 3 bef ore an ev ent (30)Breakfast:
Turkish menemen (3 lar ge whole eggs
[150 g], 1 ripe tomato , 1/2 gr een bel l
pepper)
4 slices (240 g) mul tigrain toast
1 cup (150 g) mix ed berries
5.3 oz (150 g) plain Gr eek y ogurt
Snack:
6 tbsp (90 g) hummus
1 whole wheat pi ta bread (60 g)
Lunch:~8.1 g carboh ydrate per
kilogram body weight (i.e. ,
550 g total carboh ydrate)
100 g f at
175 g pr otein
Note:  These recommendations can be adapted for other types of athletes. Macronutrient calculations are
approximate.
624
Amount of carbohydrateSample meal plan for a 68 kg (150 lb)
athlete Nutrition breakdown
Chicken stir f ry (2 cups [320 g] br own
rice, 6 oz [170 g] cook ed chick en breast,
1 cup [150 g] mix ed stir f ry vegetables
cooked in 2 tbsp [30 mL] sesame oi l)
Early afternoon snack:
1 bagel (100 g) wi th 2 tbsp (40 g) 100%
fruit jam
Post–taper run:
8 fl oz (237 mL) 100% juice
1 cup (150 g) gr anola
5.3 oz (150 g) Gr eek y ogurt
Dinner:
Indian chick en tikka masala (7 oz [200
g] chick en breast, 6.8 fl oz [200 mL]
tikka masala sauce, 5.3 oz [150 g]
cooked basmati rice, 1.8 oz [51 g]
steamed br occoli)
10-12 g carboh ydrate per
kilogram body weight consumed
on each of the two da ys bef ore
an ev ent (22)Breakfast:
Turkish menemen (3 lar ge whole eggs
[150 g], 1 ripe tomato , 1/2 gr een bel l
pepper)
Swedish o vernight oats (2.5 oz [70 g]
rolled oats, 5.3 oz [150 g] Gr eek y ogurt,
5.3 oz [150 g] mix ed berries, 1 tbsp [21
g] honey)
Snack:
8 tbsp (113 g) hummus
2 whole wheat pi ta bread (120 g)
Lunch:
Chicken stir f ry (2 cups [320 g] br own
rice, 4 oz [113 g] cook ed chick en breast,
1 cup [150 g] mix ed stir f ry vegetables,
all cook ed in 2 tbsp [30 mL] sesame oi l)
Early afternoon snack:
1 bagel (100 g) wi th 2 tbsp (40 g) 100%
fruit jam
Post–taper run:
8 fl oz (237 mL) 100% juice
1 pack et (43 g) instant oatmeal
1/3 cup (50 g) pack ed raisins added
8 fl oz (237 mL) skim mi lk
Dinner:
Indian chick en tikka masala (7 oz [200
g] chick en breast, 6.8 fl oz [200 mL]
tikka masala sauce, 5.3 oz [150 g]~10.3 g carboh ydrate per
kilogram body weight (i.e. ,
700 g total carboh ydrate)
105 g f at
210 g pr otein
Note:  These recommendations can be adapted for other types of athletes. Macronutrient calculations are
approximate.
625