# Section 11.4

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 11: Nutrition Strategies for Maximizing Performance

**Section:** 11.4 -- Body Composition Strategies

**PDF Pages:** 646--658

diabetes, insulin resistance, other diseases, and medical concerns), diet history ,
and food preferences while providing all of the nutrients an athlete needs to train
and perform optimal ly. Additional ly, resear ch shows that ongoing behavior
therapy and support can impr ove long-lasting r esults (80).
Overweight and Obesity
Overweight and obesity , both of which  reflect an accumulation of excess body
fat, increase a person’ s risk of morbidi ty from hypertension; dyslipidemia;
coronary artery disease; gallbladder disease; stroke; type 2 diabetes; sleep
apnea; osteoa rthritis; respiratory problems; and endometrial, breast, prostate,
and colon cancers (92). Obesi ty is categoriz ed as a disease and affects 34.9% of
adults and 17% of children in the United States (96). At a population level,
overweight and obesity are typical ly classified based on a body mass index
(BMI)  of 25 to 29.9 kg/m2 and ≥30 kg/m2, respectiv ely (table 11.5). Howev er,
this evaluativ e approach may have very little applicability to athletes. In reality,
BMI is a measur e of excess weight as opposed to excess body fat (92) because it
cannot distingu ish between excess fat and muscle or bone mass (26). Therefore,
BMI can overestimate body fat in athletes and others with muscular builds and
under estimate body fat in older persons or those who have lost muscle mass
(95). Finally, age, sex, ethnici ty, and muscle mass affect the association between
BMI and body fat. Strength and condi tioning professionals  should use other more
accurate measur es of body composi tion such as skinfolds, air displacement
plethysmogr aphy (ADP), multifrequency bioelectrical impedance analysis, or
dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry  (DXA) in athletes with more muscle than
their age- and sex -matched counterparts (74).
The causes of obesity are complex and include an interaction of genes and
environment, involving social, behavioral, cultural, metab olic, physiological, and
genetic factors . Howev er, many treatment options are effective, including dietary
therapy, altering physical activity patterns, behavior therapy techniques,
pharmacother apy, and surgery. Some patients and clinicians emplo y a
combination of these treatments. The initial goal for weight loss in overweight
and obese individuals should  be 10% of initial weight within six months (92).
Additional ly, target body weight  can be calcula ted using body fat percentage
and FFM (i.e., target body weight = fat free mass/[100 percent desired percent
body fat]). Where desired, percent body fat is based on measur ement type (e.g.,
ADP, DXA, skinfolds) and team, sport, and position-speci fic normativ e body
composi tion data.
Low-Carbohydrate Diets
646
The populari ty and effectiveness of low-carboh ydrate diets may have less to do with cutting
carboh ydrates (in healthy individuals) and more to do with a tempor ary decrease in water weight,
cutting calories, and increasing protein intake. When people significantly reduce their carboh ydrate
intake, they deplete their glycogen stores (carboh ydrate stored with three to four parts water) and
therefore quickly drop pounds from water weight. Once carboh ydrates are reintroduced into the
diet, they can r apidly gain the weight back (71).
Over time, howev er, low-carboh ydrate diets may work for some people because of the
consumption of increased levels of protein. Protein increases feelings of fullness (satiet y) in a dose-
dependent manner —the more protein consumed at one sitting, the greater its effect on satiet y.
Howev er, at this time the “optimal dose” for maximum satiet y remains unclear . Protein also
increases the thermic effect of feeding . More calories are burned during digesting and processing
protein than carboh ydrate or fat. And finally, protein helps spare metabol ically active lean muscle
tissue during weight loss. This is important because muscle burns a few more calories at rest than
fat does, and over time this can affect body weight. Plus, more muscle may mean that a person
can tr ain har der and ther efore burn mor e calories during tr aining (91).
Though cutting carboh ydrates may be detrimental for a number of competi tive athletes,
particularly during precompeti tion and competi tion phases, it is a very effective approach for
someone with insulin resistance (a condition that leads to the buildup of glucose in the blood
because the body does not use insulin effectively) as well as type 2 diabet es. It may also be an
effective appr oach f or overweight and obese individuals (51, 54 , 149).
No single body fat measur e should be used to assess health, disease, or
disease risk (26). Overweig ht and obesity combined with other risk factors,
including high blood pressure, high low-densi ty lipoprotein cholester ol, low high-
density lipoprotein cholester ol, high triglycerides, high blood glucose, physical
inactivi ty, family history of prematur e heart disease, or cigarette smoking,
increase a person’ s risk f or heart disease (92).
Although all obese individuals share the trait of excess body fat, they cannot
be treated homogeneously . They must be screened for coexisting illnesses such
as diabetes, orthopedic problems, cardiac disease, psychological disorders such
as binge-eating disorder  or depression, social and cultural influences, and
readiness for change. Obese athletes who are mandated to lose weight (e.g., by
a physician) pose a special challenge because losing weight is dictated by an
external source and is not an internal ized goal. Weight loss takes a great deal of
dedication from within the individual, and these athletes may need to work
closely with a mental health professional or register ed dietitian to help them
meet their goal.
TABLE 11.5  Classification of Adult Weight by Body Mass Index
(BMI) and Associated Disease Risk
647
ClassificationObesity
classBMIa
(kg/m2)DISEASE RISKb RELATIVE TO NORMAL
WEIGHT AND WAIST CIRCUMFERENCE
Men <102 cm (<40
in)
Women <88 cm (<35
in)Men >102 cm (>40
in)
Women >88 cm (>35
in)
Severely
underweight<16.5
Underweight <18.5
Normal 18.5-24 .9
Overweight 25.0-29.9 Increased High
Obesi ty I 30.0-34 .9 High Very high
II 35.0-39.9 Very high Very high
Extreme obesi ty III ≥40 Extremely high Extremely high
Note: Increased waist circumference can also be a marker for increased risk even in persons of normal
weight.
aBMI may overestimate fat in athletes and others with muscular builds and under estimate fat in older
persons and others who have lost muscle. To estimate BMI using kilograms and meters, use this equation:
body weight (kilograms) / height (meters)2. To estimate BMI using pounds and inches, use this equation:
body weight (pounds) / height (inches)2 × 703.
bDisease risk f or type 2 diabetes, h ypertension, and car diovascular disease.
Reprinted from NHLBI Obesi ty Education Initiative Expert Panel on the Identification, Evaluation, and
Treatment of Obesi ty in Adul ts (1998).
Rapid Weight Loss
Though there is no uniform defini tion in the literature, rapid weight loss gener ally
refers to quick weight loss, faster than can be achiev ed by lowering calorie
intake and increasing exercise, in a short period of time (38). Athletes may use a
variety of techniques to cut weight quickly to compete in a desired weight class,
meet a weight goal set by their coach, or improve performance. Potential ly
danger ous weight loss techniques may include fasting, fad diets, voluntary
dehydration  (diuretics, sauna, water and salt manipulation, wearing multiple
layers of clothing), excessiv e spitting, self-induced vomiting, laxativ e abuse, and
inappr opriate or ex cessiv e use of thermogenic aids (38).
Athletes who attempt to lose too much weight too quickly  may lose lean body
mass, feel fatigued, experien ce headaches or mood swings, put their training
and performance in jeopar dy, and suffer from several potential ly serious side
effects. These include dehydration, heat illness, muscle cramping, fatigue,
dizziness, suppr essed immune system functioning, hormone imbalances,
hyperthermia, reduced muscle strength, decreased plasma and blood volume,
648
low blood pressure, electr olyte imbalances, kidney failure (diuretic abuse),
fainting, and death (in extr eme cases) (38).
The strength and condi tionin g professional should be able to recogniz e the
signs and symptoms associated with rapid weight loss techniques and refer
athletes to the appropriate professional while also comm unicating concerns to
the rest of the coaching staff. In addition, the strength and condi tioning
professional may want to consider documenting the steps he or she has taken to
assist the athlete (for good record keeping and to prevent liability) while also
working with a medical doctor or register ed dietitian to set appropriate weight
goals after body composi tion, dieting, medical, and eating disorder history have
been taken into account. Some athletes may need to reconsider which weight
class they are competing in if they cannot make weight without putting their
health or perf ormance in jeopar dy.
649
Relative Energy Deficiency in Sport (RED-S)
Relative energy deficiency in sport (RED-S)  encom passes various
physiological dysfunctions resulting from low energy availability (LEA), where an
athlete’ s energy intake does not match the energy expended during exercise.
This mismatch affects metabo lic rate, menstrual function, bone health, immuni ty,
protein synthesis, and cardiovascular health, among others. This phenomenon
was initially recogniz ed in 2014 with the internatio nal RED-S consensus
statement (88) and has continued to encompass additional resear ch. For more
details on the impl ications of RED- S, see these pr evious papers (25, 89).
LEA is quanti fied by energy availa bility (EA), calculated as energy intake
minus exercise energy expendi ture, relative to fat-free mass (FFM). Optimal EA
for healthy function is around 45 kilocalories per kilogram FFM per day, while
severe perturbations can occur below 30 kilocalories per kilogram FFM per day
(25, 88). LEA adversely affects various systems, including the endocrine system,
leading to disruptions in hormonal balance, particularly in female athletes, and
possibly in males, though male athletes appear to be more physiological ly
resilient at lower EA values. LEA may be one of the strongest indicators of injury
risk for athletes (133), with oligomenorrheic and functional hypothalamic
amenorrheic (FHA) athletes reporting higher percentages of severe
musculosk eletal injuries resulting in greater durations of time lost from sport
(134).
Menstrual dysfunction, including amenorrhea , is a common consequence of
sustained LEA in female athletes, due to the impact on the hypothalamic –
pituitary–gonadal (HPG) axis. Chronic LEA also compr omises bone health,
leading to decreased bone miner al density and increased risk of bone stress
injuries, particularly in sports with high energy demands. Metabol ic changes,
including decreased RMR, and hematological alterations, such as iron deficiency ,
are also associated with LEA. Growth and development, cardiovascular function,
gastrointestinal health, and immune function are also affected, particularly at
very low levels of LEA and over longer periods of time. Psychological implications
include increased risk of depression, eating disorders, and impair ed stress
management.
Performance- wise, LEA can impair recovery, muscle function, and glycogen
storage, affecting physical and psychological capaci ty, training quality, and injury
risk (89). Howe ver, despite these associations, direct evidence of LEA’s impact on
sport performance is limited. Studies on elite athletes suggest that LEA may
impair sport performance indirectly by acutely affecting fuel storage and use
(132), reducin g training volume, and increasing risk of illness (35, 36). Yet
further resear ch with robust protocols is needed to fully understand the acute
650
and chronic effects of LEA on athletic performance. Recognizing and addressing
LEA is crucial for optimizing  athlete health, performance, and long-term well-
being. Health care practitioners and coaches should be vigilant for signs of LEA
and its associated health implications, implementing strategies to mitigate risks
and support athletes in achieving optimal energy balance and performance
outcomes.
651
Feeding and Eating Disorders
Eating disorders, including binge-eating disorder, anorexia nervosa, and
bulimia nervo sa, are serious mental health disorders that can affect both men
and women, appear at any point in life, and increase risk of mortal ity. Those with
eating disorders have a high prevalence of other psychiatric disorders, including
anxiet y disorders, mood disorders such as depression, impulse-contr ol disorders,
and substance abuse disor ders (49, 58).
Studies show an increased  prevalence of both disordered eating  and
eating disorders  in athletes compared to controls (45, 128, 151). In particular ,
athletes in sports with weight classes such as wrestling, those in sports that
emphasiz e leanness such as cross country running, and aesthetic sports such as
gymnastics may be more prone to disordered eating and eating disorders (45,
128, 151). Signs of disordered eating may include restrictiv e eating; fasting;
skipping meals ; and taking diet pills, laxativ es, or diuretics. Howev er, those with
disordered eating do not meet the full diagnostic criteria for an eating disorder
(45).
Eating disorders are multifactorial diseases and, as such, require a
multidiscipl inary team approach. The strength and condi tioning professional must
be aware of signs and symptoms of an eating disorder and have a referral
network in place so athletes can get the psychological, medical, and nutrition
help they need f rom experts who work wi th eating disor ders.
Anorexia Nervosa
Anorexia nervosa is characteriz ed by a distorted body image and an intense fear
of gaining weight or becoming fat, leading those with this disease to excessiv e
calorie restricti on and severe weight loss (8). Those with anorexia nervosa also
put a great deal of emphasis  on their weight or shape yet do not recogniz e the
seriousness of their illness. Also, people with anorexia nervosa typically engage
in ritualistic behaviors including repeated weighing, cutting food into small
pieces, and car efully portioning their f ood (92).
Two subtypes fall under anorexia nervosa. The restricting type does not
regularly binge eat or purge, while the binge-eating or purging type regularly
engages in binge eating or pur ging.
The incidence peaks in the early 20s for both males and females, and the
lifetime prevalence in females ages 10 to 39 years ranges from 0.21% to 0.89%,
and in males ages 10 to 39 years it ranges from 0.19% to 0.67% (143).
Estimates based on data model ing reveal that 14% of females with anorexia
nervosa and 28.2% of males seek treatment (143). It is important to note that
among all mental health disorders, anorexia nervosa has the highest mortal ity
652
rate (49, 143). For more information about anorexia nervosa, the reader is
encour aged to read the American Psychiatric Association’ s Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disor ders, Fi fth Edi tion (DSM- V) (8).
Symptoms of Anorexia Nervosa
Signs and Symptoms of Anorexia Nervosa
Extremely r estricted eating
Intense and ex cessiv e exercise
Extreme thinness (emaciation)
A relentless pursui t of thinness and un willingness to maintain a heal thy weight
Intense f ear of gaining weight
Distorted body image or sel f-image
Denial of the seriousness of low body weight
Serious Health Consequences of Anorexia Nervosa
Thinning of the bones (osteopenia or osteopor osis)
Mild anemia
Muscle w asting and weakness
Delayed pubert y
Severe constipation
Low blood pr essure
Slowed br eathing and pulse
Damage to the structur e and f unction of the heart
Feeling tir ed all the time
Infertility
Brain damage
Multiple or gan failure
Reprinted from National Institute of Mental Health, “Eating Disorders: What You Need to Know,” U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services, National Institutes of Health, retrieved August 7, 2025, https://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/publications/eating-
disorders.
Binge-Eating Disorder
Previously categoriz ed under “eating disorder not otherwise specified,” binge-
eating disorder has its own category in the DSM- V (8). Binge-eating disorder is
characteriz ed by repeated episodes, occurring at least once a week for a period
of three weeks, of uncontr olled binge eating (eating significantly more food in a
short period of time than most people would eat under the same circumstances)
(55). The binge-eating episodes are associated with three or more of the
following:
Eating much mor e rapidly than normal
653
Eating unti l feeling uncomf ortably f ull
Eating lar ge amounts of f ood when not f eeling ph ysical ly hungry
Eating alone because of f eeling embarr assed b y how much one is eating
Feeling disgusted wi th onesel f, depr essed, or v ery gui lty afterw ard (55)
Because binge-eating episodes are not followed by purging, as is the case
with bulimia nervosa, people  with binge-eating disorder are often overweight or
obese. The lifetime prevalence for males ages 10 to 39 years is estimated to be
0.69% to 1.93% and 1.08%  to 3.14% in females of the same age, with peak
onset in the early to mid-20s (143). A lifetime prevalence of binge-eating
disorder is associated with morbid obesity (BMI >40). Over the course of a
lifetime, it is estimated that approximately 30% of males and 29.7% of females
with binge-eating disorder receive treatment (143). Binge eating is associated
with significant physical and psychological problems. Additional ly, people with
binge-eating disorder may feel embarr assed, guilty, or disgusted with their
behavior and ma y attempt to hide their beha vior b y eating alone (55).
Bulimia Nervosa
Bulimia nervosa is characteriz ed by recurrent consumption of food in amounts
significantly greater than would customari ly be consumed in a discrete period of
time—f or example, an entire pizza and a half-gallon of ice cream, plus a package
of cookies. Purging follows episodes of binge eating and may include one or
more of the following: self-induced vomiting, intense exercise, laxativ e use, or
diuretic use. The bingeing and purging occur at least once a week for a period of
three months (55). People with bulimia nervosa feel a lack of control over their
eating during binge episodes and are more likely to be normal weight as
opposed to underweight, are unhapp y with their weigh t and body, and fear
weight gain. Average age of onset for bulimia nervosa is in the early 20s, and
the lifetime prevalence is 0.08% to 0.30% in males ages 10 to 39 and 0.56% to
1.7% in females of the same age range. Approximately 15.7% of males and
17.7% of females are estimated to receive treatment (143). For more
information about bul imia, the r eader is encour aged to r efer to DSM- V (84).
Avoidant/Restrictive Food Intake Disorder
Avoidant/r estrictiv e food intake disorder (ARFID) is an eating or feeding
disturbance, including appar ent lack of interest in eating or food; avoidance
based on the sensory characteristics of food; or concern about aversive
consequences of eating. This disorder is manifested by persistent failure to meet
appropriate nutritional or energy needs associated with one (or more) of the
following (55):
654
Significant weight loss (or failure to achiev e expected  weight gain or
faltering gr owth in chi ldren)
Significant nutri tional deficiency
Dependence on enter al feeding or or al nutri tional supplements
Marked interf erence wi th psy chosocial f unctioning
The disturban ce is not better explained by lack of available food or by
associated cul turally sanctioned pr actice.
The eating disturbance does not occur exclusiv ely during the course of
anorexia nervosa or bulimia nervosa, and there is no evidence of a disturbance
in the w ay in which one’ s body weight or shape is experienced.
The eating disturbance is not attributable to a concurr ent medical condi tion or
not better explained by another mental disorder. When the eating disturbance
occurs in the context of another condi tion or disorder, the severity of the eating
disturbance exceeds that routinely associated with the condition or disorder and
warrants addi tional cl inical at tention (55).
Pica
People with pica eat nonnutri tive substances for a period of at least one month.
Common nonnutri tive substances include clay, laundry starch, ice, cigarette
butts, hair, or chalk (68). Those with pica may have electr olyte and metabol ic
disorders, intestinal obstruction, wearing away of tooth enamel, and
gastrointestinal problems, among other issues. Testing for anemia is
recommended since pica is associated wi th iron deficiency (68).
Rumination Disorder
Rumination involves chewing, reswallowing, or spitting of regurgitated food. To
be classified as having this disorder, one must displa y this behavior, unrelated to
any medical condi tion, for at least one month. Rumination  disorder can occur
alongside other eating issues or disor ders (55).
Symptoms of Bulimia Nervosa
Signs and Symptoms of Bulimia Nervosa
Vomiting
Taking laxativ es
Exercising ex cessiv ely
Fasting
Serious Health Consequences of Bulimia Nervosa
Chronical ly inflamed and sor e throat
655
Swollen sal ivary glands in the neck and ja w area
Worn tooth enamel, incr easingly sensi tive and deca ying teeth
Acid r eflux disor der and other gastr ointestinal pr oblems
Intestinal distr ess and irri tation
Severe deh ydration
Electr olyte imbalance
Reprinted from National Institute of Mental Health, “Eating Disorders: What You Need to Know,” U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services, National Institutes of Health, retrieved August 7, 2025, https://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/publications/eating-
disorders.
Eating Disorders: Management and Care
It is not the responsibi lity of the strength and condi tioning professional to treat
or diagn ose an eating disorder. It is his or her ethical responsibi lity to assist the
athlete in attaining the proper diagnosis from a qualified physician and treatment
from a qualified treatment team. Therefore, strength and condi tioning
professionals should be mindf ul of the symptoms of each eating disorder as well
as signs of disordered eating . Keep in mind that abnorm al eating patterns and
amenorrhea alone are not indicativ e of an eating disorder. A professional who is
experienced and qualified in diagnosing and treating eating disorders should be
contacted when an athlete’ s beha vior is concerning.
Eating Disorder Resources
National Eating Disorders Association
www.nationaleatingdisor ders.org
International Association of Eating Disorders Professionals
www.iaedp .com
The Renfrew Center Foundation
www.renfrewcenter .com
National Association of Anorexia Nervosa and Associated Disorders
www.anad .org
The Meadows Ranch
www.meadowsr anch.com
The strength and conditioning professional is not responsible for
treating eating disorders but instead should be aware of the
symptoms associated with an eating disorder and refer athletes to
the appropriate professional.
656
Conclusion
The primary role of nutrition in strength and condi tioning is to support athletic
performance. A gener al understanding of nutrition principles and applications is
essential for strength and condi tioning professionals so that they can provide
consistent, accurate informat ion to their athletes while also being able to identi fy
the potential signs and symptoms of an eating disorder. And though pre-,
during-, and postcompeti tion nutrition can lead to better performance, a
nutritional ly sound daily diet should be emphasiz ed as well for overall health,
greater tr aining adaptations, and perf ormance.
KEY TERMS
amenorrhea
anabol ic window
anorexia nerv osa
basal metabol ic rate (BMR)
binge-eating disor der
body mass index (BMI)
bulimia nerv osa
calorie
carboh ydrate-electr olyte (carboh ydrate) drink
carboh ydrate loading
creatine kinase
diet-induced thermogenesis
disordered eating
dual-ener gy X-ray absorptiometry (D XA)
eating disor ders
energy availability (EA)
exogenous
isocaloric
kilocalorie
obesity
net pr otein balance
precompeti tion meal
relative ener gy deficiency in sport (RED- S)
resting metabol ic rate (RMR)
target body weight
voluntary deh ydration
657
STUDY QUESTIONS
  1.  Which of the following is a key strategy for precom petition nutrition in
athletes?
  a.  consuming high-f at and high-fiber f oods to pr omote satiet y
  b.  choosing carboh ydrates and fluid to maximiz e ener gy and h ydration
  c.  avoiding pr otein intak e before competi tion to pr event muscle sor eness
  d.  trying new f oods during pr actice sessions to minimiz e stomach
discomf ort
  2.  Which of the following statements about nutrition during aerobic
endur ance ev ents and intermi ttent-activity sports is ac curate?
  a.  Pr otein intak e has no impact on perf ormance or muscle damage.
  b.  Athletes should a void consuming carboh ydrates during pr olonged
exercise to pr event stomach discomf ort.
  c.  Pr oper h ydration and carboh ydrate intak e are essential to maintain
performance and pr event deh ydration.
  d.  Sport drinks wi th a carboh ydrate concentr ation higher than 10% ar e
ideal f or quick absorption.
  3.  What are the recommen ded amounts of carboh ydrate and protein intake
for aerobic endur ance athletes during their most demanding training
phases or competi tion?
  a.  carboh ydrate: 1.5 to 2.0 gr ams per ki logram body weight per da y;
protein: 1.40 to 2.0 gr ams per ki logram body weight per da y
  b.  carboh ydrate: 8 to 10 gr ams per ki logram body weight per da y;
protein: 1.40 to 2.0 gr ams per ki logram body weight per da y
  c.  carboh ydrate: 1.5 to 2.0 gr ams per ki logram body weight wi thin 30
minutes after ex ercise; pr otein: 10 to 40 gr ams wi thin a 32-hour time
period after aer obic endur ance ex ercise
  d.  carboh ydrate: 28 to 140 gr ams per hour during pr olonged aer obic
endur ance ex ercise; pr otein: 1.5 to 2.0 gr ams per ki logram body
weight wi thin 30 minutes after ex ercise
4. What are the recommended macronutrient intakes for strength or speed
athletes during peak tr aining periods?
a. carboh ydrate: 1.4 to 1. 7 grams per ki logram body weight per da y;
protein: 5 to 6 gr ams per ki logram body weight per da y
b. carboh ydrate: 30 to 100 gr ams immediately f ollowing weightl ifting or
strength competi tions; pr otein: 20 to 30 gr ams of high-leucine pr otein
every 3 to 4 hours
c. carboh ydrate: 5 to 6 gr ams per ki logram body weight per da y; protein:
1.4 to 1.8 gr ams per ki logram body weight per da y
658