# Section 11.2

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 11: Nutrition Strategies for Maximizing Performance

**Section:** 11.2 -- During-Event Nutrition

**PDF Pages:** 626--635

Amount of carbohydrateSample meal plan for a 68 kg (150 lb)
athlete Nutrition breakdown
cooked basmati rice, 1.8 oz [51 g]
steamed br occoli
Note:  These recommendations can be adapted for other types of athletes. Macronutrient calculations are
approximate.
Fluid intake guidel ines are different for children. According to the American
Academ y of Pediatrics, children weighing 40 kg (88 pounds) should drink 5 fluid
ounces (148 mL) of cold water or a flavored salted beverage every 20 minutes
during practice, while adolescents  weighing 60 kg (132 pounds) should drink 9
fluid ounces (266 mL) every 20 minutes even if they do not feel thirsty. They
also recomme nd a sodium chloride concentr ation of 15 to 20 mmol/L
(appr oximately 1 g per liter), which has been shown to increase voluntary
hydration by 90% when compared to unflavored water (30, 106, 147). Despi te
these recommendations, keep in mind that 9 ounces of fluid at one time is a
consider able amount for an adolescent and may cause stomach distress.
Therefore, these guidel ines may need to be adjusted for individual athletes,
depending on siz e and sweat r ates.
Aerobic Endurance Sports
Consuming carbohydrates during prolonged aerobic endur ance exercise can
improve performance while also reducing exercise-induced stress and
suppr ession of immune system functioning (95). And though sport drinks provide
carboh ydrates, they cannot keep up with an athlete’ s carboh ydrate use during
prolonged, intense activity (unless an excessiv e amount of fluid is consumed). In
fact, athletes who train intensely may burn 600 to 1,200 calories or more per
hour (70). Several studies show that a carboh ydrate intake ranging from 28 to
144 grams per hour (with higher amounts studied during cycling) during an
aerobic endur ance activity can decrease reliance on limited glycogen stores,
extend time to exhaustion, and improve performance by providing a steady
stream of carboh ydrate that can be used f or ener gy (32, 66, 137).
Despi te greater intakes per hour, as noted earlier, exogenous  (extern al; that
which is consumed) carboh ydrate oxidation rates do not exceed 1.0 to 1.1 gram
per minute, likely due to the rate of glucose absorption and possibly also the
limited delivery rate of 1 gram per minute of glucose into the bloodstr eam (65).
Howev er, each carboh ydrate has a different rate of oxidation. Glucose, sucrose,
maltose, maltodextrins, and amylopectin are oxidized quickly; the oxidation rates
of fructose, galactose, and amylose are 25% to 50% slower (65). Additional ly,
each type of carboh ydrate has a different intestinal transport system. If an
athlete consumes one type of carboh ydrate—f ructose, for instance—
626
carboh ydrate digestion will be limited when the intestinal transporter for fructose
becomes saturated. Therefore, consuming multiple types of carboh ydrates
together , such as sucrose, fructose, and glucose or maltodextrin, increases the
rate of carboh ydrate absorption and exogenous carboh ydrate oxidation
compar ed to consuming an isocaloric  amount of just one type of sugar (62). In
addition to improving the rate of carboh ydrate use by the body, consuming
multiple types of carboh ydrate during exercise was found to improve cycling
time-trial performance after 120 minutes of cycling (the study design simulated
the last few stages of an aerobic endur ance race when an athlete must provide
maximum effort) when subjects were provided glucose combined with fructose
versus glucose only at a rate of 1.8 grams per minute (108 g of carboh ydrate per
hour) (34). Additional ly, athletes given 36 grams of glucose and fructose every
15 minutes had a better 100 kilometer (62 miles) cycling time than cyclists given
only glucose ev ery 15 minutes (137).
In addition to actual ly ingesting carboh ydrates, simply rinsing carboh ydrates
through the mouth (without actual ly ingesting them) seems to improve
performance lasting approximately 1 hour by 2% to 3%, presumably by affecting
the centr al nerv ous system (64).
In addition to providing carbohydrates during an aerobic endur ance activity,
adding protein to a carboh ydrate gel led to increased time until exhaustion
during a bout of cycling while also attenuating the rise in creatine kinase (a
marker of muscle damage) during cycling, due either to the protein itself or to
the additional calories provided by the protein (119). A meta- analysis and review
of the resear ch examining how the addition of protein to carboh ydrate affects
aerobic endur ance performance revealed mixed findings (119). Only time-to-
exhaustion studies showed that the addition of protein made a significant
difference. However, these studies were not controlled for calorie intake during
the trial; therefore, it is unclear if any benefi t was due to protein or to the added
calories provided by the protein. The three time-tria l studies showed no
difference between carboh ydrate only and carboh ydrate plus pr otein (127).
Fructose and Gastrointestinal Symptoms
Fructose, a sugar found naturally in fruit and also added to a number of foods and beverages,
including many sports nutrition products, is often blamed for symptoms of stomach upset during
exercise. Though some people do not completely absorb fructose and may therefore experience
bloating, gas, abdominal discomf ort, and alterations in bowel functioning after consuming this
sugar (123), studies have not examin ed gastrointestinal symptoms related to fructose ingestion
alone in athletes. Thus, athletes need to test, in practice, whether changing their sport drinks or
other products they consume during training (and testing fructose-f ree conditions) helps alleviate
any gastrointestinal symptoms they may be having (126). Athletes with irritable bowel syndr ome
are mor e likely to ha ve a pr oblem absorbing f ructose and ther efore experience side ef fects (123).
627
Intermittent High-Intensity Sports
Many team sports, such as soccer, tennis, basketball, and American footbal l,
include repeat ed bouts of short-duration, high-intensi ty activity in addition to
involving a wide range of skills. Fatigue during play could stem from a number of
factors, including decreased or depleted glycogen stores and dehydration. The
provision of both fluids and carboh ydrate is essential for performance during
prolonged intermi ttent sports. For instance, a long tennis match may last 4 hours
—consider ably longer than many aerobic endur ance events. Because tennis
players cannot  drink continuously during a match and can lose more than 2.5
liters (84.5 fl oz) of fluid per hour, a recommendation of 200 to 400 milliliters
(6.7-13.5 fl oz) per changeo ver (switching sides) has been put forth for these
athletes (69). In addition to maintaining hydration status, resear ch shows that
carboh ydrate supplementation may not affect ratings of perceived exertion (46)
but improves stroke quality (which includes measur es of velocity, precision, and
error rate) during pr olonged pla y (141).
In soccer players, 5 milliliters (0.2 fl oz) per kilogram body weight of a 6.9%
glucose-polymer drink, consumed 15 minutes before each match and at halftime,
made no difference in several measur es of performan ce such as successful
tackles, headin g, dribbl ing, or shooting ability (150). Yet another soccer study,
this one with professional soccer players, found that the group consuming a
carboh ydrate-electr olyte beverage improved some parameters of performance
during match play. In this study, 22 professional male soccer players consumed
the same diet for seven days (55% of the calorie s were derived from
carboh ydrate, 25% from fat, and 20% from protein), refrained from exercise for
three days before the match, and consumed a standar dized breakfast 4 hours
before the match on game day. They were divided into two groups, receiving
either a carboh ydrate-electr olyte drink (7% carboh ydrates, sodium 24 mmol/L,
chloride 12 mmol/L, potass ium 3 mmol/L) or placebo . Each group drank 5
milliliters (0.2 fl oz) per kilogram body weight before the match and 2 milliliters
(0.1 fl oz) per kilogram body weight every 15 minutes  during the 90-minute
game. The group receiving the carboh ydrate-electr olyte drink finished the
specific dribble test faster than those receiving the placebo . In addition, ratings
of precision were higher in the carboh ydrate-electr olyte trial versus placebo .
Howev er, there were no differences in the coordination or power tests between
groups. In this particular study, supplementation with a carboh ydrate-electr olyte
drink impr oved soc cer-speci fic ski ll performance compar ed wi th a placebo (101).
In another study that found that during-pla y carboh ydrate consumption was
beneficial, a randomiz ed, double-bl ind protocol was used. Seventeen male soccer
players received 8 milliliters (0.3 fl oz) of a 6.4% carboh ydrate-electr olyte
beverage per kilogram body weight before exercise plus 3 milliliters (0.1 fl oz)
628
per kilogram body weight after every 15 minutes (for a total of 52 g of
carboh ydrate per hour) during a 90-minute intermi ttent shuttle test (6).
Consuming the carboh ydrate-electr olyte beverage attenuated a significant
decrease in skill reduction from before exercise until the last 15 to 30 minutes of
exercise compar ed to placebo. In the carboh ydrate trial, there was a 3%
reduction in skill performance during this time period, while in the placebo trial a
15% decline in skill performance was noted. Howev er, this trial was performed
after carboh ydrate-depleting exercise followed by a low-carboh ydrate meal and
then an overnight fast; therefore, the effect of carboh ydrates on performance
may depend not only on the amount consumed during intermi ttent activities but
also on whether the athlete is competing in a fed or fasted and glycogen-
depleted state (6).
In another study, which used four 15-minute quarters of intermi ttent high-
intensi ty shuttles at various intensi ties (walking, jogging, running, sprinting, and
jumping), separated by a 20-minute rest at halftime and followed by a shuttle
run to fatigue (designed to mimic a competi tive soccer or basketball game),
subjects who consumed a carbohydrate-electrolyte (carbohydrate) drink
before exercise (5 mL of a 6% solution per kilogram body weight) and at
halftime (5 mL of a 18% solution per kilogram body weight) ran 37% longer in
the run to fatigue than those receiving a placebo and were significantly faster in
a 20 meter (22 yd) sprint during the fourth quarter. In addition, the
carboh ydrate-supplemented group performed better on a total body motor skill
test during the later stages of exercise and reported decreased perceptions of
fatigue, indicating that the consumption of a carboh ydrate-electr olyte beverage
during intermi ttent sports is adv antageous (145).
Strength and Power Sports
Carboh ydrates are also an essential source of energy used during resistance
training and therefore in strength and power sports. Resear ch studies using a
series of different weightl ifting protocols found that participants used a
significant amount of muscle  glycogen (78), though this is notably lower than
what is typical ly seen for power –endur ance or intermi ttent high-intensi ty sports.
Most of these studies had participants perform just a few sets of exercises.
Therefore, athletes who perform in strength and power competi tions or sports,
or in positions that rely on muscle strength and power (e.g., hammer throwers
and offensive linemen in American footbal l), could deplete their muscle glycogen
stores to a level that affects performance. Furthermor e, starting with already low
carboh ydrate stores will increase muscle breakdown (76). Strength and power
athletes can maintain their glycogen stores, which may decrease muscular
629
fatigue in slow-twitch fibers and possibly lead to better performance, by
supplementing wi th carboh ydrate bef ore and during competi tion (47).
During-Competition Food and Fluid
Recommendations
Due to large variations in sweat rates and electr olyte concentr ations, athletes should measur e
weight changes during training and competi tion in specific weather condi tions and develop
individual ized hydration strategies based on this information (120). During prolonged activity in hot
weather , the Institute of Medicine recommends sport drinks containing 20 to 30 mEq of sodium
(460-690 mg with chloride as the anion) per liter, 2 to 5 mEq of potassium (78-195 mg) per liter,
and carboh ydrate in a concentr ation of 5% to 10% (2).
Hydration guidance for children and adolescents consists of 5 to 9 fluid ounces (148-266 mL) of
cold water or a flavored salted beverage or sport drink depending on their weight. For example,
children or adolescents weighing 40 kilograms (88 lb) should drink 5 fluid ounces (148 mL) and
those weighing 60 kg (132 lb) should drink 9 fluid ounces (266 mL) every 20 minutes during
practice, even if they do not feel thirsty (30, 37, 106). Aerobic endur ance athletes should consume
28 to 144 grams of multiple types of carbohydrates together , such as sucrose, fructose, glucose, or
maltodextrin, each hour during pr olonged aer obic endur ance activi ty (32, 34 , 66, 137).
Postcompetition Nutrition
The postcompeti tion meal helps athletes rehydrate, replenish glycogen stores,
and repair muscle tissue. Therefore, what they consume in the time period soon
after training or competi tion helps optimiz e adaptations as well as prepare their
body for the next bout of activity. This time frame has been referred to as a
garage door of opportuni ty because the athlete’ s body is primed to assimi late
nutrients and also because this previously assumed anabolic window  is
actual ly much longer than was original ly thought (11). Each athlete’ s
postcompeti tion needs vary based on the sport he or she plays, intensi ty during
play, amount of time played, the individual’ s weight and age, and probably the
person’ s sex. Howev er, much more resear ch has been conducted with male
subjects as opposed to females; therefore, recommendations are not broken out
based on sex due to a lack of suf ficient data in f emales.
After competi tion, athletes should replace fluid and electr olyte losses. If time
permi ts, normal meals, snack s (provided they contain some sodium), and water
will restore fluid and electr olyte losses. More salt can be added to foods when
sweat sodium losses are substantial (1, 120). Athletes can choose a
carboh ydrate-electr olyte sport drink or plain water alongside foods that contain
sodium chlorid e (or they can salt their foods) since sodium is essential for
helping the body retain fluid (83, 120, 125). Rehydration strategies should be
individual ized as much as possible. Athletes competing in weight -class sports
such as wrestling and mixed martial arts may deliberately dehydrate themselv es
630
to make weight and attempt to rehydrate before competi tion, though short time
periods betwee n weighing and competing may mean starting competi tion in a
dehydrated state, leading to poor perf ormance and heal th risks.
Aerobic Endurance Events
After prolonged aerobic endurance events, it is important to replenish
carboh ydrate stores before the next training session or competi tion (whichev er
comes first) and to aid in immune system function and consume enough protein
to build and repair muscle. Glycogen synthesis occurs in two distinct phases. The
first phase is independent of insulin and lasts 30 to 60 minutes, and glycogen
synthesis occurs rapidly . The second phase lasts several hours, and glycogen
synthesis occurs at a much slower pace. Glycogen synthesis occurs at a rapid
rate when large amounts of carboh ydrate, 1.0 to 1.85 grams per kilogram body
weight per hour, are consumed immediately after exercise or competi tion and at
regular interv als every 15 to 60 minutes thereafter for up to 5 hours (61). For
some athletes, though, it may be difficult to ingest carboh ydrate quanti ties at the
upper end of that range. Though athletes may be able to fully replenish their
glycogen stores right away or over the course of a 24-hour period after a long
training session, this is not necessari ly the case after competi tion. Strenuous
aerobic endur ance events that result in measur able muscle damage, such as the
marathon, lead to delayed glycogen resynthesis even if an athlete consumes a
higher -carboh ydrate diet, possibly due to either metabol ic disturbance or
mechanical damage to muscle cel ls (12, 124).
Though athletes are often told that they need to eat carboh ydrate
immediately after they finish competing, resear ch shows that this is not always
necessary; they may be able to wait 2 hours after finishing a glycogen-depleting
event before eating carboh ydrate, although this may not necessari ly be optimal.
In a study examining the rate of glycogen resynthesis, five high-gly cemic meals
were given to athletes over the course of a 24-hour period after a 2-hour -long
glycogen-depleting bout of cycling. One group received the first three meals over
the 4-hour period after exercise, while the second group received the first three
meals at regular 2-hour interv als starting 2 hours after they finished over the
first 6 hours after exercise. The rate of glycogen resynthesis was the same
between groups after 8 hours and after 24 hours (103). Therefore, athletes who
have more than 24 hours to recover can likely wait before eating after exercise
and replace their glycogen over the 24-hour time period after exercise as long as
they consume an adequate amount of carboh ydrate, though they may not
receive the same systemic recovery benefi ts beyond glycogen replenishment.
Howev er, athletes who train two or three times a day or have less than 24 hours
to recover may want to consider eating or drinking a high-carboh ydrate meal
631
immediately after finishing their event and at regular interv als thereafter to
quickly r eplenish gly cogen stor es.
Because prolonged aerobic endur ance exercise breaks down muscle tissue,
protein should be included in the aerobic endur ance athlete’ s posttraining meal
to help start muscle building and repair, which may attenuate posttraining and
postev ent muscle soreness (85). Consuming protein after training has another
benefi t: It increases the rate of glycogen storage if carbohydrate intake is less
than 1.2 grams of carboh ydrate per kilogram body weight per hour (61). In a
randomiz ed, controlled trial, 18 elite orienteers partic ipated in 13 exercise
sessions during one week. Half of the orienteers (the PRO-CON group) ingested
a protein drink before (0.3 g per kilogram body weight) and a protein-
carboh ydrate drink (0.3 g protein per kilogram body weight + 1 g carboh ydrate
per kilogram body weight) after training. The other half of participants consumed
an isocaloric carboh ydrate-only beverage before and after exercise (CHO). Diet
was kept consistent throughout the study (15%/63%/22%
protein/carboh ydrate/fat) except for the addition of the supplements. The basic
diet plus supplements provided 3 grams of protein per kilogram body weight per
day and 8.3 to 9.3 grams of carboh ydrate per kilogram body weight per day in
the PRO-CON group; the CHO group consumed 1.8 grams of protein per
kilogram body weight per day and 8.8 to 10.8 grams carboh ydrate per kilogram
body weight per day. A 4-kilometer (2.5 miles) run test was performed at the
beginning and end of the study and 2 hours after participants consumed a
standar dized breakfast. PRO-CON significantly improved performance and
reduced markers of muscle breakdown, while CHO did not improve performance.
Howev er, it is not clear from this study if the timing of protein made the
difference or the increased total daily intake of protein in the PRO-CON as
compar ed to the CHO gr oup (48).
Other resear ch does suggest that protein is important after aerobic endur ance
exercise. For instance, a single-bl ind, randomiz ed, triple-cr ossover design was
used to assess how different doses of a protein–leucine blend affected
myofibrillar protein fractional synthetic rate (FSR; muscle protein synthesis) in 12
aerobic endur ance-tr ained men after 100 minutes of high-intensi ty cycling
(performed 3 hours after a standar dized breakfast; diet the day before the test
was standar dized based on calorie needs and provided the same percentage of
carboh ydrate, protein, and fat for each subject). Cyclists consumed 70 g/15
g/180 g/30 g protein/leucine/  carboh ydrate/fat, or 23 g/5 g/180 g/30 g, or 0 g/0
g/274 g/ 30 g (contr ol) in four servings during the first 90 minutes of a 240-
minute (4-hour) recovery period. The lower -protein, lower -leucine supplement
(23 g/5 g/180 g/30 g) increased FSR by 33% ± 12% compared to the control
group, while additional protein and leucine (70 g/15 g/180  g/30 g) increased FSR
632
by 51% ± 12% compar ed to the control group. Though no significant differences
were noted between the two protein and leucine groups, both fared better than
the placebo group, indicatin g that protein is important after a long, tough
workout (118) . Given different workouts, exercise completed in a fasted or
unfasted state, and different doses of protein (10-96 g) used in other studies,
the precise minimum dose of protein needed to maximiz e FSR after aerobic
endur ance exercise is not clear (21, 57). Additional ly, it is not clear if maximizing
FSR in the time period immediately after aerobic endurance exercise will
translate to improved performance over time. And finally, the ideal time period
after aerobic endurance training during which protein should be consumed is not
clear and may depend on whether training was completed in a fasted or
unfasted state as well as on total daily protein intake. However, one study found
that delaying protein intake after aerobic endur ance exercise by as little as 3
hours blunts i ts anabol ic effects (77).
High-Intensity Intermittent Sports
Because athletes who participate in intermi ttent high-intensi ty sports—such as
basketball, hockey, and soccer—may play more than one game per day,
sometimes with just a few hours in between tournament games, immediate
recovery after a game is imper ative for performance in their next game. And
when competing in sports that involve prolonged high-intensi ty intermi ttent
activity, such as soccer, American footbal l, field and ice hockey, rugby, and
tennis, athletes  may significantly reduce their muscle glycogen stores, leading to
muscular and cogni tive fatigue (13). Fully replacing muscle glycogen before a
subsequent bout of exercise or competi tion may prolong  time until fatigue and
improve performance. In a study designed to mimic a soccer game, Nicholas and
colleagues had six males complete the same exercise test separ ated by 22 hours
on two consecutiv e days—75  minutes of a prolonged, intermi ttent, high-intensi ty
shuttle run test after which they completed as many 20 meter (22 yd) shuttles as
possible (each shuttle alternated between jogging and sprinting). Subjects were
assigned to one of two diets for the 22-hour recovery period: a recovery diet
including 10 grams of carboh ydrate per kilogram body weight or an isocaloric
diet with more protein and fat than their normal daily diet. Intermi ttent running
capaci ty improved after the higher -carboh ydrate diet as compared to the higher -
calorie condi tion with more protein and fat (94). Also, Balsom and colleagues
found that male study subjects performed significantly more work in both short-
term (<10 min) and prolonged (>30 min) high-intensi ty intermi ttent exercise
sessions after consuming a high- versus low-carboh ydrate diet for the 48-hour
period bef ore the ex ercise sessions (13).
633
High-intensi ty intermi ttent sports can lead to some degree of muscle damage
depending on many factors including the time and intensity of play and body
size. Studies show that consuming protein after exercise helps decrease some
markers of muscle damage (42). And though postex ercise carboh ydrate intake
can affect performance in a subsequent event or training session, particularly
when sessions are close together in time, the addition of protein will likely not
affect performance in a subsequent bout of exercise during the 4-hour recovery
period f ollowing the ini tial ev ent or ex ercise session (85).
Strength and Power Sports
Athletes in strength and power sports rely on both blood glucose and glycogen
for energy during competi tion. Because a single bout of resistance training can
lead to significant reductions  in glycogen (78) and decreases in glycogen can
impair force production and isometric strength while accentuating muscle
weakness, it is imper ative that these athletes restore glycogen levels before their
next bout of exercise (47). During the recovery period after strength and power
competi tions, athletes should focus on consuming higher -glycemic carboh ydrates
immediately after exercise if they must compete or train again over the course of
the 24-hour period after the initial training session or competi tion. The amount
of carbo hydrate they need to fully replenish glycogen stores depends on many
factors, including intensi ty and the time spent competing, their overall body
weight and muscle mass, their preexercise meal (and state of glycogen stores
before competi tion), and whether they consumed carboh ydrate during the
competi tion. In a crossover study, after an overnight fast, eight men who
completed 6 sets of single-leg  knee extensions at 70% of the 1RM, until 50% of
full knee extension was no longer possible, deplete d glycogen levels by
approximately 29%. Within 6 hours of the completion of training, they restored
up to 91% of their preexercise levels after consuming 1.5 gram of carboh ydrate
per kilogram body weight immediately after the resistanc e training session and
again 1 hour later. Howev er, when study subjects consumed water only
immediately after training and again 1 hour later, they barely restored their
muscle gly cogen content to 75% of pr eexercise lev els (104).
Net protein balance  depends on both muscle protein synthesis and
breakdown. And though carboh ydrates have no effect on muscle protein
synthesis, they help attenuate acute protein breakdown resulting from resistance
exercise. The increase in protein breakdown likely depends on the resistance
stimulus, the person’ s overall nutrition intake, and dietary intake before and
during training  or competi tion. One study in untrained young men found that
acute protein breakdown increased by 51% ± 17% after a bout of resistance
training (16). In another study, the rate of both mixed muscle protein fractional
634
synthesis rate (muscle protein synthesis) and fractional breakdown rate
(breakdown) were measur ed after a bout of either concentric or eccentric
exercise in four untrained men and four untrained women. The rate of synthesis
increased significantly above resting levels by 112% in the 3-hour period after
exercise, 65% over the 24-ho ur period after exercise, and 34% over the 48-hour
period after exercise. Muscle breakdown also increased by 31% and 18% in the
3- and 24-hour periods after exercise yet returned to baseline by 48 hours after
exercise (110). Relatively small amounts of carboh ydrate, somewher e between
30 and 100 grams, can sufficiently reduce muscle protein breakdown (18, 43).
Although muscle protein breakdown has a role in overall protein balance, muscle
protein synthesis pla ys a much bigger r ole in o verall protein balance (43).
Supplementing with protein after a muscle-damaging bout of resistance
training increases acute muscle protein synthesis. Varying amounts of protein
have been used after resista nce training to stimulate muscle protein synthesis,
though it appears that 20 to 50 grams (providing about 8.5 g-20 g of essential
amino acids) of a high-qual ity, high-leucine, fast protein (one that leads to a
rapid rise in amino acids in the bloodstr eam) in younger individuals may
maximal ly stimulate muscle protein synthesis, while 40 grams or more may be
necessary in older adults (59, 109). Rice protein is an intermediate-speed
leucine-poor protein (though the rise in leucine in the bloodstr eam appears
quickly after consumption of rice protein); larger doses of rice protein effectively
stimulate muscle protein synthesis to the same extent as a higher -quality protein
when matched for leucine content (67). Therefore, the leucine content of the
protein, and possibly the speed of leucine delivery, appears to be the
determining factor for acute changes in maximal stimulation of muscle protein
synthesis. A protein dose that contains 2 to 3 grams of leucine or 0.05 grams of
leucine per kilogram body weight will effectively stimulate muscle protein
synthesis in y ounger adul ts (96, 102, 136).
In addition to the acute increase in muscle protein synthesis, consistently
supplementing with protein after resistance training led to small to moder ate
increases in muscle hypertr ophy over time compar ed to condi tions in which
subjects were not given protein supplements (27, 122). Only one study to date
has directly examined the relationship between acute measur es of muscle
protein synthe sis and hypertr ophy due to resistance training. In this study 23
young men who were recreational ly active but had not participated in a
resistance training exercise program in at least a year were tested for initial
strength and resting and postex ercise rates of muscle protein synthesis. Then
they participated in a 16-week linear resistance training program consisting of
two days of lower body (e.g., leg press, leg extension, leg curl, and calf press)
and two days of upper body (e.g., chest press, shoulder press, seated row, lat
635