# Chapter 11: Nutrition Strategies for Maximizing Performance

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

**PDF Pages:** 613--658

CHAPTER  11
NUTRITION STRATEGIES FOR
MAXIMIZING PERFORMANCE
Shawn M. Arent, PhD, and Abbie E. Smith-Ryan, PhD
The authors would l ike to acknowledge the signi ficant contribution of Marie Spano to this chapter .
After completing this chapter, you will be able to
list pre-, during-, and postcompeti tion nutri tion recommendations f or
different sports;
understand nutri tion guidel ines f or aer obic ex ercise perf ormance and
recovery;
understand nutri tion recommendations f or str ength and h ypertr ophy;
provide guidel ines f or weight gain and weight loss;
identi fy hydration r ecommendations;
recogniz e signs and symptoms of r elative ener gy deficiency syndr ome
(RED- S) and eating disor ders;
understand the importance of ha ving an interv ention and r eferral system in
place f or athletes suspected of ha ving an eating disor der;
recogniz e the pr evalence and etiologies of obesi ty; and
assist in the assessment pr ocess f or obese individuals.
What athletes eat and drink before and during competi tion can affect their
performance, while their postev ent meal has a greater impact on their recovery
and, if the time period between events is less than 24 hours, performance in the
next event or game. Therefore, this chapter focuses on pre-, during-, and
postcompeti tion nutrition while also providing guidel ines for athletes who want to
lose or gain weight. Additionally, no talk about weight is complete unless it
includes information on disordered eating and eating disorders. It is imper ative
that the strength and condi tioning professional recogniz e when an athlete may
613
have signs and symptoms of an eating disorder and be an active member of the
treatment team.
614
Precompetition, During-Event, and
Postcompetition Nutrition
Athletes’ dietary practices over time will influence their overall health and
performance. Additional ly, what athletes eat before and during competi tion can
have both physiological and psychological effects on performance, while their
postcompeti tion meal affects recovery and may therefore influence how they
perform during their next bout of tr aining or competi tion.
Precompetition Nutrition
The precompetition meal  helps provide fluid to mainta in adequate hydration,
carboh ydrate to maximiz e blood glucose and stored glycogen levels, and protein
to reduce muscle soreness (7, 31). Glycogen is the main form of energy used
during high-intensi ty (>70% V̇O2max) exercise; once these stores become
depleted, the athlete will experience muscular fatigue (60). Small quanti ties of
glycogen are stored in liver and muscle, totaling approximately 15 grams of
glycogen per kilogram body weight (3). For example, an 80 kilogram (176 lb)
man can store approximately  1,200 grams of glycogen. Glycogen stored in the
liver is used for the whole body, while glycogen stored in muscle tissue is used
by muscle (60).
Despi te the vital roles that both hydration and glycogen play in athletic
performance, studies examining the importance of the precompeti tion meal and
its effect on performance are equiv ocal due to differences in study subjects and
methods used.  Some show that a high-carboh ydrate preexercise meal enhances
aerobic time to exhaustion (29, 98) as well as anaer obic performance in
adolescent males (75), while no effect on time trial performance has been
reported in the literature (105). Despi te these differences and the fact that
studies simulating performance cannot take into account several factors that
distinguish the competi tive environment from a lab setting, such as
precompeti tion nerves, temper ature, humidi ty, and altitude, athletes can adapt
gener al precompeti tion guidel ines based on the literature to fit their own unique
needs and the competi tive environment they are in. Importantly , an
individual ized precompeti tion meal should be consumed.
All precompeti tion meals should take timing, meal and fluid composi tion,
event or sport, and individual athlete preferences into account. In order to
minimiz e the potential for stomach upset, smaller quanti ties of fluids and food
should be consumed when the precompeti tion meal is consumed closer in
tempor al proximity to competi tion. Precompeti tion foods and beverages should
be familiar to the athlete (i.e., tried in practice), low in fat and fiber so that they
615
empty rapidly from the stomach and minimiz e any potential for gastrointestinal
distress, and moder ate in protein (protein promotes longer -lasting satiet y and
accelerates r ecovery) (7).
Athletes can choose from either high or low glycemic index (131) (see chapter
10 for more details) carboh ydrates before competi tion based on individual
preference or tolerance and fiber content; resear ch does not indicate that one is
more advantageous than the other (15). Even though consuming carboh ydrates
that rapidly increase insulin, such as glucose, will lead to an initial drop in blood
sugar at the beginning of exercise, blood sugar levels typically return to normal
within approximately 20 minutes, and the initial drop has no negativ e effect on
performance (82).
Minimizing Gastrointestinal Issues
To minimiz e the likelihood of stomach discomf ort during competi tion, athletes should do the
following:
Try food in practice first. Always try new foods during several practice sessions before
competi tion (7).
When the meal is closer in time to the start of the game or event, consume smaller amounts
of food and l iquids.
Avoid high-f at and high-fiber foods. Both fat and fiber slow down the rate of digestion. When
food is still being digested as an athlet e exercises, he or she may experience stomach cramps
(7).
Avoid sugar alcohols. Despi te their name, sugar alcohols contain no alcohol, but their
chemical structur e resembles that of both sugar and alcohol. Sugar alcoho ls are a type of
carboh ydrate that is not completely absorbed in the gut. Consequently , consumption can
cause gas, bloating, and cramping and may have a laxativ e effect. Sugar alcohols are found in
some low-carboh ydrate and sugar -free products, including sugar -free gum, toothpaste, and
energy drinks. The two sugar alcohols most likely to cause gastrointestinal issues are sorbitol
and mannitol (4). Any product that could result in consumption of 20 grams of manni tol must
carry this warning on the label: “Excess consumption may have a laxativ e effect.” Individual
responses to sugar alcohol vary. Sugar  alcohols include xylitol (the most common one found
in dental products) , erythri tol, sorbitol, manni tol, maltitol, isomal t, lactitol, hydrogenated
starch hydrolysates, and h ydrogenated glucose syrups (4).
Aerobic Endurance Sports
The precompet ition meal may be most important for aerobic endur ance athletes
who compete in long-dur ation activity (>2 h) in the morning after an overnight
fast. Upon waking in the morning, blood sugar levels are low and liver glycogen
stores are substantial ly reduced. Both condi tions decrease the amount of
carboh ydrate available for use as energy. Carboh ydrates at the precompeti tion
meal can significantly enhance glycogen stores and improve exercise time to
616
exhaustion in those who regularly include carboh ydrate in their diets, when
consumed 3 or mor e hours bef ore competi tion (33, 146).
A crossover study examine d whether a precompeti tion high-carboh ydrate
meal combined with a carboh ydrate-electr olyte sports drink consumed during
exercise improved aerobic endur ance running capaci ty (70% V̇O2max until
exhaustion) more than the sports drink alone (28). The scientists had men
perform three treadmi ll runs, each separ ated by one week, after an overnight
fast followed by a carboh ydrate meal 3 hours before exercise in addition to a
carboh ydrate-electr olyte sports drink during running; a carboh ydrate meal 3
hours before exercise and water during running; or a low-calorie placebo drink
(same flavor as the sport drink) 3 hours before exercise and water during
running. They replicated the same diet for the two-da y period before each trial.
No differences were noted in average daily caloric intake between the three
trials. Consumption of the high-carboh ydrate preexercise meal improved aerobic
endur ance running capaci ty by 9% compar ed to the placebo drink before
exercise and water during the run. Howev er, the high-carboh ydrate meal plus
sport drink during the run improved aerobic endur ance capaci ty by 22%
compar ed to the placebo beforehand and sport drink during the run. These
results indicate that a high-carboh ydrate preexercise or precompeti tion meal can
help impr ove aerobic endur ance running capaci ty (28).
Aerobic endur ance athletes who are not chronical ly adapted to a low-
carboh ydrate diet and start exercise with depleted glycogen stores will break
down muscle to use amino acids for energy and may acutely suppr ess immune
and central nervous system functioning. Therefore, a high-carboh ydrate
preexercise meal can help attenuate the breakdown of skeletal muscle while also
providing carbohydrate for immune and nervous system  functioning (23, 76).
Over time, adaptation to chronic consumption of a low-carboh ydrate diet
increases the body’s reliance on its vast storage of fat as a fuel source during
exercise, though training with low glycogen stores may suppr ess immune and
central nervous system functioning (23, 53). In a study examining protein
catabol ism, six subjects rode a cycle ergometer for 1 hour at 61% V̇O2max after
a carbohydrate loading  protocol or carboh ydrate depletion. In the
carboh ydrate-depleted state, protein breakdown was calculated at 13.7 grams
per hour , which r epresented 10. 7% of the calories used during ex ercise (76).
It is clear that a preexercise meal consumed hours before competi tion can
help improve aerobic endur ance performance. Howev er, extremely early morning
start times can compl icate the desire to feed with a concurr ent desire for
maximum sleep. For instance, a runner who must be at the starting line of a race
at 7:00 a.m. may find that waking up at 3:00 or 4:00 a.m. to eat is not practical.
Athletes who find themselv es in this scenario should practice eating small
617
amounts of food 1 to 2 hours before they start, transitioning to easily digestible
carboh ydrates and liquid carboh ydrates before competi tion, while also ensuring
that they consume an adequate amount of carboh ydrate during competi tion.
The following are gener al recommendations that can be adapted to meet each
athlete’ s individ ual needs. More resear ch needs to be done to examine the needs
of athletes in a variety of sports and to determine the effects of varying amounts
of each macronutrient on performance (100). Until this is done, the guidel ines
for aerobic endur ance athletes are adapted to other sports. This information
should also be appl ied to str ength, power , and team or field sport athletes.
Preexercise feeding may be more important than postex ercise feeding if an
athlete is underf ueled. Female athletes may see greater benefi ts from their
training when nutrients are consumed before exercise compared to after
exercise on str ength and lean mass adaptations (111).
Athletes should  prehydrate, if necessary , several hours before exercise to
allow for fluid absorption and urine output. Their urine specific gravity
(USG) r eading should be <1.02 (120).
Athletes who tend to get nauseated easily, who have experienced diarrhea
during competi tion, who get anxious or experience precompeti tion jitters,
or who compe te in high-intensi ty sports (jarring movements can increase
the likelihood of stomach upset), as well as those who are competing in
the heat, may want to consider eating at least 4 hours before competi tion,
as well as trying a variety of types of low-fiber carbo hydrate options.
Aerobic endur ance athletes who eat at least 4 hours before competi tion
should include approximately 1 to 4 grams of carboh ydrate per kilogram
body weight and 0.15 to 0.25 grams of protein per kilogram body weight
(131).
If the precomp etition meal is consumed 2 hours before exercise, athletes
should aim for approximately  1 gram of carboh ydrate per kilogram body
weight. Athletes should follow an individual ized hydration plan. During
prolonged activity in hot weather , they should consume a sport drink
containing 20 to 30 mEq of sodium (460-690 mg with chloride as the
anion) per liter, 2 to 5 mEq of potassium (78-195 mg) per liter, and
carboh ydrate in a concentr ation of 5% to 10% (120).
When consume d closer to the start of competi tion, the preexercise meal
should be smaller. Additionally, liquid sources of carboh ydrate may be
preferable when the preexercise meal is 1 hour before the event because
they are emptied from the stomach faster than solid food (7). Gels,
gummies, and similar sources of carboh ydrate are also digested very
quickly . Table 11.1 summariz es these recomm endations while providing
sample f ood options.
618
TABLE 11.1  Precompetition Food and Fluid Recommendations
for Aerobic Endurance Athletes
Time before
competitionFood
recommendationsFluid
recommendationsSample
precompetition
meals for a 68
kg (150 lb)
athleteSample meals based on
food and fluid
recommendations
1 h 0.5 g carboh ydrate
per ki logram body
weight34 g
carboh ydrate1 smal l
banana
8 fl oz
(237 mL)
sport
drink37 g
carboh ydrate
8 fl oz (237
mL) fluid
2 h 1 g carboh ydrate
per ki logram body
weightIf not adequately
hydrated, sip on 3-5
mL (0.10-0.17 fl oz)
of fluid per ki logram
body weight (120)68 g
carboh ydrate
7-12 fl oz (207-
355 mL) fluid2.5 cups
(525 g)
boiled,
plain
potato ,
flesh only
2 mini
bagels
with 1
tbsp (20
g) jam
8 fl oz
(237 mL)
sport
drink66 g
carboh ydrate
72 g
carboh ydrate
8 g pr otein
8 fl oz (237
mL) fluid
4 h or mor e1-4 g carboh ydrate
per ki logram body
weight
0.15-0.25 g pr otein
per ki logram body
weight (105)Should consume
approximately 5-7
mL (0.17-0.24 fl oz)
of water or a sport
drink per ki logram
body weight (120)68-273 g
carboh ydrate
10-17 g pr otein
Minimal f atBowl of
cereal
and fruit
(8 fl oz
[237 mL]
skim
milk, 2
cups [55
g]
Cheerios,
1/4 cup
[40 g]
unpack ed
raisins)74 g
carboh ydrate
11 g pr otein
14 fl oz (414
mL) w ater
Egg
white
sandwich
(2 egg
whites, 2
pieces of72 g
carboh ydrate
(based on 1
slice = 64 g
weight)
17 g pr otein
Note:  These r ecommendations can be adapted f or other t ypes of athletes.
619
Time before
competitionFood
recommendationsFluid
recommendationsSample
precompetition
meals for a 68
kg (150 lb)
athleteSample meals based on
food and fluid
recommendations
white
bread)
(skip
high-
fiber
breads
before
workout)14 fl oz (414
mL) w ater
Note:  These r ecommendations can be adapted f or other t ypes of athletes.
Athletes may want to keep a record of their food intake, including the time
each meal or snack was consumed and how they felt while training. By recording
the types and amounts of food consumed and when these are consumed in
relation to training, athletes may be able to identi fy any issues they are having
with performance or stomach upset and develop a better precompeti tion plan.
Carboh ydrate foods that are high in fructose, sorbitol, and fermentable
oligosac charides, disaccharid es, monosac charides, and polyols (FODMAPs) may
increase the risk of gastrointestinal distress when consumed before exercise.
Selecting foods that are lower FODMAP and lower fructose may minimiz e the
likelihood of gastr ointestinal issues.
The primary  purpose of the precompetition meal is to provide
sufficient fluid to maintain hydration and carbohydrate to
maximize blood glucose and stored glycogen while also satisfying
hunger.
Carbohydrate Loading
Depletion of muscle and liver glycogen leads to fatigue during long-term aerobic
endur ance exercise (117, 129, 141). Therefore, a technique called carboh ydrate
loading  has been used for decades to enhance muscle glycogen  before aerobic
endur ance events. Although there are many different variations of carboh ydrate
loading, all include high carboh ydrate intake in the days leading up to an event
to maximize glycogen stores and therefore carboh ydrate availability in the later
stages of the event (32). Carboh ydrate loading offers potential benefi ts for
athletes training and compe ting for more than 90 minutes, such as distance
runners, road cyclists, cross-country skiers, and other aerobic endur ance athletes
who risk depleting glycogen stores, and it may conceiv ably benefi t other athletes
as wel l (112).
620
A comm only used carboh ydrate loading regimen includes three days of a high-
carboh ydrate diet in concert with tapering exercise the week before competi tion
and complete rest the day before the event. The diet should provide adequate
calories and carboh ydrate per day: 8 to 10 grams of carboh ydrate per kilogram
body weight. This regimen should increase muscle glycogen stores 20% to 40%
above normal (32). Howev er, higher intakes, 10 to 12 grams of carboh ydrate per
kilogram body weight, have been suggested for runners during the 36 to 48
hours bef ore a mar athon (22).
Studies show that carboh ydrate loading is effective in men (129). Howev er,
the studies in women have been mixed. One study examined the effects of
carboh ydrate loading on aerobic endur ance performance  and substr ate use in
eight 20- to 40-year-old weight -stable, eumenorrheic female runners with an
average runnin g history of 53 kilometers (33 miles) per week for at least 12
months before the study and a typical carboh ydrate intake below 65% of total
caloric intake (9). Each female completed three different 24.2-kilometer (15-
mile) self-paced treadmi ll performance runs after four days on each experimental
diet regimen: carboh ydrate supplementation (50% of calories from
carboh ydrate), carboh ydrate loading and supplementation (75% of calories from
carboh ydrate), and placebo (50% of calories from carbohydrate). Both the
carboh ydrate-supplemented and carboh ydrate loading plus supplementation
groups consumed a 6% carboh ydrate-electr olyte solution before exercise (6
mL/kg of body weight) and every 20 minutes during exercise (3 mL/kg of body
weight). And though the carboh ydrate-supplemented and carboh ydrate loading
plus supplemen tation groups used a greater portion of energy from carboh ydrate
during their runs, there was no significant difference in running performance
between the groups. Howev er, both total calories and grams of carboh ydrate per
day were not reported; therefore, it is possible that total calorie or carboh ydrate
intakes (or both) were not adequate for the runners. Additionally, given the small
number of subjects included in this study, differences in performance may have
been noted i f mor e subjects had been included (9).
In another study, resear chers found that males increased glycogen content
significantly while female athletes did not after increasing carboh ydrate intake
from 58% to 74% of calories for four days before a submaximal aerobic
endur ance exercise test, due to either inadequate carboh ydrate or calorie intake
(or both) or sex differences in glycogen storage (129). In a follow-up study, the
same resear chers examined glycogen storage capaci ty in six well-trained men
and six well-trained women (132). Subjects were random ly assigned to one of
three diets for four days: a high-carboh ydrate diet (75% of total calorie intake),
a high-c arboh ydrate diet plus extra calories (75% of calories from carboh ydrate
and a 34% increase in total calories), or their habitual daily diet. In men, both
621
the higher-carboh ydrate diet and higher -carboh ydrate plus extra calories diet led
to significantly  greater levels of glycogen than the habitual diet. Howev er, in
women, only the higher -carboh ydrate plus extra calories diet resulted in
significant increases in glycogen storage compar ed to the habitual diet. In the
high-carboh ydrate condi tions, men increased their total carboh ydrate intake to
7.9 grams of carboh ydrate per kilogram body weight, whereas women reached
just 6.4 grams of carboh ydrate per kilogram body weight. No differences were
noted between  men and women in their ability to use glycogen as measur ed by
enzymatic activity. Therefore, the failure of previous studies to show improved
performance from carboh ydrate loading in women was likely due to inadequate
overall carboh ydrate intake (132). This theory (that women were not consuming
enough total carboh ydrate in many of the protocols) was backed up in a study
examining female cyclists. In trained female cyclists, three or four days on a
moder ate-carboh ydrate diet (48% of calories from carboh ydrates) followed by
three or four days consuming 78% of calories from carboh ydrates (8.14 g of
carboh ydrate per kilogram body weight) led to significant increases in glycogen
stores and greater cycling time to exhaustion compar ed to seven days on the
moder ate-carboh ydrate diet (142). Resear chers have found that glycogen
storage capaci ty in the 4-hou r time period after exercise did not differ between
men and women when they consumed the same amount of carboh ydrate per
unit body weight (1 g of carboh ydrate per kilogram body weight immediately and
1 hour after the completion of exercise) (130). And while glycogen storage
capaci ty is greater during the luteal phase of the menstr ual cycle in women as
compar ed to the early follicular phase due to hormonal differences, carboh ydrate
loading and incr eased carboh ydrate intak e can mak e up f or this di fference (99).
The main challenge with carboh ydrate loading in females  appears to be their
overall daily calorie intake. Women who habitually consume less than 2,400
calories per day may find it difficult to consume greater amounts of
carboh ydrate. Therefore, female athletes may need to increase their total energy
intake above 2,400 calories, in addition to consuming a higher -carboh ydrate diet,
in order to incr ease gly cogen stor es (129, 142).
Though the majori ty of studies on carboh ydrate loading have been done in
aerobic endur ance athletes, some resear ch has attempted to examine
carboh ydrate loading for athletes in high-intensi ty sports as well. In a
randomiz ed, crossover design, seven professional soccer players who consumed
an average of 46% of calori es from carboh ydrates ate either a 39% or a 65%
carboh ydrate diet two days before being testing. Each test consisted of 6,858
meters (7,500 yd) of field work (completed at 65%, 57%, and 81% V̇O2max)
followed by a treadmi ll run to exhaustion in an attempt to mimic a soccer game.
After the high-carboh ydrate diet, the players ran 17.1 kilometers (10.6 miles)
622
total, which was 0.9 kilomete rs (0.6 miles) longer (a significant difference) than
the distance run while on the lower -carboh ydrate diet. Howev er, three of the
athletes ran less than 420 meters (459 yd) longer , indicatin g significant variabi lity
in the athletes’ responses to a higher -carboh ydrate regimen (14). The results of
this study may or may not be applicable to soccer players, since the average
distance covered in a soccer match is consider ably shorter (10.3 km [6.4 miles]
with a range of 9.7 to 11.3 km [6.0-7 .0 miles], as reported in one study), and it
is covered in an intermi ttent manner and at v arying lev els of intensi ty (72).
In a study examining the effect of carboh ydrate loading on resistance exercise
performance, eight healthy young men were randomly assigned to either a
higher -carboh ydrate (6.5 g of carboh ydrate per kilogram body weight) or a
moder ate-carboh ydrate diet (4.4 g of carboh ydrate per kilogram body weight) for
four days. After this period, they participated in a resistance exercise test
including 4 sets of 12 repetitions of maximal-ef fort jump squats with a load of
30% of a 1-repetition maxim um (1RM) and a 2-minute rest period between sets
(52). There was no significant difference in power performance between subjects
on the high-carboh ydrate and the moder ate-carboh ydrate diets. Therefore, in
this study a higher -carboh ydrate diet did not enhance power performance during
a 4-set resistance exercise test. Howev er, it is unclear whether the carboh ydrate
loading regimen could have affected power performance if more sets were
performed or if the carboh ydrate loading regimen more closely resembled that of
an aerobic endur ance athlete, providing 8 to 10 grams carbohydrate per kilogram
body weight (52).
The degree of benefi t derived from carboh ydrate loading varies between
individuals, even between aerobic endur ance athletes, and therefore athletes
should determ ine the value of this regimen while weighing any negativ e side
effects, such as tempor ary weight gain, in practice before competi tion. Athletes
who use carboh ydrate loading as a means to maximiz e glycogen storage should
also know how different types of carboh ydrates affect them. For instance,
oligosac charides, which are found in dry beans and peas, onions, and foods with
added inulin or other oligosac charides (such as some nutrition bars and shakes),
are rapidly fermented by bacteria in the gut, which can lead to excessiv e
intestinal gas and bloating. Dietary fiber is found in vegetables, fruits, whole
grains, dry beans and peas, nuts, and seeds (140). Table 11.2 provides a sample
daily meal plan for a 68-kilogram (150-pound) athlete following resear ch-based
carboh ydrate recommendations f or aer obic endur ance athletes.
Carbohydrate loading is an effective strategy to maximize glycogen
storage. How ever, athle tes must consume 8 to 10 grams of
623
carbohydrate per kilogram body weight per day during the loading
period to notice any benefit from carbohydrate loading.
During-Event Nutrition
Nutrition is an important factor during aerobic endur ance events lasting greater
than 45 minutes, intermi ttent-activity sports, or when an athlete has multiple
events in one day. Fluids and carboh ydrates can directly affect performance.
Amino acid oxidation, primari ly the branched chain amino acids, are oxidized
during sustained aerobic endur ance exercise, providing substr ate for
gluconeogenesis. Easily digestible proteins can minimiz e muscle damage and
substr ate depletion (116).
Proper hydration during competi tion is essential for performance while also
helping to prevent overheating, dehydration, and heat illness. Athletes should
hydrate several hours before exercise to allow for fluid absorption and urine
output before competing. Additional ly, they should consum e enough fluid during
exercise to prevent water weight losses exceeding 2% of body weight (120). The
optimal sport drink contains 20 to 30 mEq of sodium (460-690 mg with chloride
as the anion) per liter, 2 to 5 mEq of potassium (78-1 95 mg) per liter, and
carboh ydrate in a concentr ation of 5% to 10% (2). Sport drinks with a higher
concentr ation of carboh ydrate—those that contain more than 8%—dela y gastric
emptying (how quickly the drink is emptied from the stomach), which could lead
to stomach discomf ort (87). Therefore, a carboh ydrate concentr ation of 6% to
8% ma y be ideal (120).
TABLE 11.2  Carbohydrate Loading Regimens and Sample
Daily Meal Plans for Aerobic Endurance Athletes
Amount of carbohydrateSample meal plan for a 68 kg (150 lb)
athlete Nutrition breakdown
8-10 g carboh ydrate per
kilogram body weight consumed
on da y 3 bef ore an ev ent (30)Breakfast:
Turkish menemen (3 lar ge whole eggs
[150 g], 1 ripe tomato , 1/2 gr een bel l
pepper)
4 slices (240 g) mul tigrain toast
1 cup (150 g) mix ed berries
5.3 oz (150 g) plain Gr eek y ogurt
Snack:
6 tbsp (90 g) hummus
1 whole wheat pi ta bread (60 g)
Lunch:~8.1 g carboh ydrate per
kilogram body weight (i.e. ,
550 g total carboh ydrate)
100 g f at
175 g pr otein
Note:  These recommendations can be adapted for other types of athletes. Macronutrient calculations are
approximate.
624
Amount of carbohydrateSample meal plan for a 68 kg (150 lb)
athlete Nutrition breakdown
Chicken stir f ry (2 cups [320 g] br own
rice, 6 oz [170 g] cook ed chick en breast,
1 cup [150 g] mix ed stir f ry vegetables
cooked in 2 tbsp [30 mL] sesame oi l)
Early afternoon snack:
1 bagel (100 g) wi th 2 tbsp (40 g) 100%
fruit jam
Post–taper run:
8 fl oz (237 mL) 100% juice
1 cup (150 g) gr anola
5.3 oz (150 g) Gr eek y ogurt
Dinner:
Indian chick en tikka masala (7 oz [200
g] chick en breast, 6.8 fl oz [200 mL]
tikka masala sauce, 5.3 oz [150 g]
cooked basmati rice, 1.8 oz [51 g]
steamed br occoli)
10-12 g carboh ydrate per
kilogram body weight consumed
on each of the two da ys bef ore
an ev ent (22)Breakfast:
Turkish menemen (3 lar ge whole eggs
[150 g], 1 ripe tomato , 1/2 gr een bel l
pepper)
Swedish o vernight oats (2.5 oz [70 g]
rolled oats, 5.3 oz [150 g] Gr eek y ogurt,
5.3 oz [150 g] mix ed berries, 1 tbsp [21
g] honey)
Snack:
8 tbsp (113 g) hummus
2 whole wheat pi ta bread (120 g)
Lunch:
Chicken stir f ry (2 cups [320 g] br own
rice, 4 oz [113 g] cook ed chick en breast,
1 cup [150 g] mix ed stir f ry vegetables,
all cook ed in 2 tbsp [30 mL] sesame oi l)
Early afternoon snack:
1 bagel (100 g) wi th 2 tbsp (40 g) 100%
fruit jam
Post–taper run:
8 fl oz (237 mL) 100% juice
1 pack et (43 g) instant oatmeal
1/3 cup (50 g) pack ed raisins added
8 fl oz (237 mL) skim mi lk
Dinner:
Indian chick en tikka masala (7 oz [200
g] chick en breast, 6.8 fl oz [200 mL]
tikka masala sauce, 5.3 oz [150 g]~10.3 g carboh ydrate per
kilogram body weight (i.e. ,
700 g total carboh ydrate)
105 g f at
210 g pr otein
Note:  These recommendations can be adapted for other types of athletes. Macronutrient calculations are
approximate.
625
Amount of carbohydrateSample meal plan for a 68 kg (150 lb)
athlete Nutrition breakdown
cooked basmati rice, 1.8 oz [51 g]
steamed br occoli
Note:  These recommendations can be adapted for other types of athletes. Macronutrient calculations are
approximate.
Fluid intake guidel ines are different for children. According to the American
Academ y of Pediatrics, children weighing 40 kg (88 pounds) should drink 5 fluid
ounces (148 mL) of cold water or a flavored salted beverage every 20 minutes
during practice, while adolescents  weighing 60 kg (132 pounds) should drink 9
fluid ounces (266 mL) every 20 minutes even if they do not feel thirsty. They
also recomme nd a sodium chloride concentr ation of 15 to 20 mmol/L
(appr oximately 1 g per liter), which has been shown to increase voluntary
hydration by 90% when compared to unflavored water (30, 106, 147). Despi te
these recommendations, keep in mind that 9 ounces of fluid at one time is a
consider able amount for an adolescent and may cause stomach distress.
Therefore, these guidel ines may need to be adjusted for individual athletes,
depending on siz e and sweat r ates.
Aerobic Endurance Sports
Consuming carbohydrates during prolonged aerobic endur ance exercise can
improve performance while also reducing exercise-induced stress and
suppr ession of immune system functioning (95). And though sport drinks provide
carboh ydrates, they cannot keep up with an athlete’ s carboh ydrate use during
prolonged, intense activity (unless an excessiv e amount of fluid is consumed). In
fact, athletes who train intensely may burn 600 to 1,200 calories or more per
hour (70). Several studies show that a carboh ydrate intake ranging from 28 to
144 grams per hour (with higher amounts studied during cycling) during an
aerobic endur ance activity can decrease reliance on limited glycogen stores,
extend time to exhaustion, and improve performance by providing a steady
stream of carboh ydrate that can be used f or ener gy (32, 66, 137).
Despi te greater intakes per hour, as noted earlier, exogenous  (extern al; that
which is consumed) carboh ydrate oxidation rates do not exceed 1.0 to 1.1 gram
per minute, likely due to the rate of glucose absorption and possibly also the
limited delivery rate of 1 gram per minute of glucose into the bloodstr eam (65).
Howev er, each carboh ydrate has a different rate of oxidation. Glucose, sucrose,
maltose, maltodextrins, and amylopectin are oxidized quickly; the oxidation rates
of fructose, galactose, and amylose are 25% to 50% slower (65). Additional ly,
each type of carboh ydrate has a different intestinal transport system. If an
athlete consumes one type of carboh ydrate—f ructose, for instance—
626
carboh ydrate digestion will be limited when the intestinal transporter for fructose
becomes saturated. Therefore, consuming multiple types of carboh ydrates
together , such as sucrose, fructose, and glucose or maltodextrin, increases the
rate of carboh ydrate absorption and exogenous carboh ydrate oxidation
compar ed to consuming an isocaloric  amount of just one type of sugar (62). In
addition to improving the rate of carboh ydrate use by the body, consuming
multiple types of carboh ydrate during exercise was found to improve cycling
time-trial performance after 120 minutes of cycling (the study design simulated
the last few stages of an aerobic endur ance race when an athlete must provide
maximum effort) when subjects were provided glucose combined with fructose
versus glucose only at a rate of 1.8 grams per minute (108 g of carboh ydrate per
hour) (34). Additional ly, athletes given 36 grams of glucose and fructose every
15 minutes had a better 100 kilometer (62 miles) cycling time than cyclists given
only glucose ev ery 15 minutes (137).
In addition to actual ly ingesting carboh ydrates, simply rinsing carboh ydrates
through the mouth (without actual ly ingesting them) seems to improve
performance lasting approximately 1 hour by 2% to 3%, presumably by affecting
the centr al nerv ous system (64).
In addition to providing carbohydrates during an aerobic endur ance activity,
adding protein to a carboh ydrate gel led to increased time until exhaustion
during a bout of cycling while also attenuating the rise in creatine kinase (a
marker of muscle damage) during cycling, due either to the protein itself or to
the additional calories provided by the protein (119). A meta- analysis and review
of the resear ch examining how the addition of protein to carboh ydrate affects
aerobic endur ance performance revealed mixed findings (119). Only time-to-
exhaustion studies showed that the addition of protein made a significant
difference. However, these studies were not controlled for calorie intake during
the trial; therefore, it is unclear if any benefi t was due to protein or to the added
calories provided by the protein. The three time-tria l studies showed no
difference between carboh ydrate only and carboh ydrate plus pr otein (127).
Fructose and Gastrointestinal Symptoms
Fructose, a sugar found naturally in fruit and also added to a number of foods and beverages,
including many sports nutrition products, is often blamed for symptoms of stomach upset during
exercise. Though some people do not completely absorb fructose and may therefore experience
bloating, gas, abdominal discomf ort, and alterations in bowel functioning after consuming this
sugar (123), studies have not examin ed gastrointestinal symptoms related to fructose ingestion
alone in athletes. Thus, athletes need to test, in practice, whether changing their sport drinks or
other products they consume during training (and testing fructose-f ree conditions) helps alleviate
any gastrointestinal symptoms they may be having (126). Athletes with irritable bowel syndr ome
are mor e likely to ha ve a pr oblem absorbing f ructose and ther efore experience side ef fects (123).
627
Intermittent High-Intensity Sports
Many team sports, such as soccer, tennis, basketball, and American footbal l,
include repeat ed bouts of short-duration, high-intensi ty activity in addition to
involving a wide range of skills. Fatigue during play could stem from a number of
factors, including decreased or depleted glycogen stores and dehydration. The
provision of both fluids and carboh ydrate is essential for performance during
prolonged intermi ttent sports. For instance, a long tennis match may last 4 hours
—consider ably longer than many aerobic endur ance events. Because tennis
players cannot  drink continuously during a match and can lose more than 2.5
liters (84.5 fl oz) of fluid per hour, a recommendation of 200 to 400 milliliters
(6.7-13.5 fl oz) per changeo ver (switching sides) has been put forth for these
athletes (69). In addition to maintaining hydration status, resear ch shows that
carboh ydrate supplementation may not affect ratings of perceived exertion (46)
but improves stroke quality (which includes measur es of velocity, precision, and
error rate) during pr olonged pla y (141).
In soccer players, 5 milliliters (0.2 fl oz) per kilogram body weight of a 6.9%
glucose-polymer drink, consumed 15 minutes before each match and at halftime,
made no difference in several measur es of performan ce such as successful
tackles, headin g, dribbl ing, or shooting ability (150). Yet another soccer study,
this one with professional soccer players, found that the group consuming a
carboh ydrate-electr olyte beverage improved some parameters of performance
during match play. In this study, 22 professional male soccer players consumed
the same diet for seven days (55% of the calorie s were derived from
carboh ydrate, 25% from fat, and 20% from protein), refrained from exercise for
three days before the match, and consumed a standar dized breakfast 4 hours
before the match on game day. They were divided into two groups, receiving
either a carboh ydrate-electr olyte drink (7% carboh ydrates, sodium 24 mmol/L,
chloride 12 mmol/L, potass ium 3 mmol/L) or placebo . Each group drank 5
milliliters (0.2 fl oz) per kilogram body weight before the match and 2 milliliters
(0.1 fl oz) per kilogram body weight every 15 minutes  during the 90-minute
game. The group receiving the carboh ydrate-electr olyte drink finished the
specific dribble test faster than those receiving the placebo . In addition, ratings
of precision were higher in the carboh ydrate-electr olyte trial versus placebo .
Howev er, there were no differences in the coordination or power tests between
groups. In this particular study, supplementation with a carboh ydrate-electr olyte
drink impr oved soc cer-speci fic ski ll performance compar ed wi th a placebo (101).
In another study that found that during-pla y carboh ydrate consumption was
beneficial, a randomiz ed, double-bl ind protocol was used. Seventeen male soccer
players received 8 milliliters (0.3 fl oz) of a 6.4% carboh ydrate-electr olyte
beverage per kilogram body weight before exercise plus 3 milliliters (0.1 fl oz)
628
per kilogram body weight after every 15 minutes (for a total of 52 g of
carboh ydrate per hour) during a 90-minute intermi ttent shuttle test (6).
Consuming the carboh ydrate-electr olyte beverage attenuated a significant
decrease in skill reduction from before exercise until the last 15 to 30 minutes of
exercise compar ed to placebo. In the carboh ydrate trial, there was a 3%
reduction in skill performance during this time period, while in the placebo trial a
15% decline in skill performance was noted. Howev er, this trial was performed
after carboh ydrate-depleting exercise followed by a low-carboh ydrate meal and
then an overnight fast; therefore, the effect of carboh ydrates on performance
may depend not only on the amount consumed during intermi ttent activities but
also on whether the athlete is competing in a fed or fasted and glycogen-
depleted state (6).
In another study, which used four 15-minute quarters of intermi ttent high-
intensi ty shuttles at various intensi ties (walking, jogging, running, sprinting, and
jumping), separated by a 20-minute rest at halftime and followed by a shuttle
run to fatigue (designed to mimic a competi tive soccer or basketball game),
subjects who consumed a carbohydrate-electrolyte (carbohydrate) drink
before exercise (5 mL of a 6% solution per kilogram body weight) and at
halftime (5 mL of a 18% solution per kilogram body weight) ran 37% longer in
the run to fatigue than those receiving a placebo and were significantly faster in
a 20 meter (22 yd) sprint during the fourth quarter. In addition, the
carboh ydrate-supplemented group performed better on a total body motor skill
test during the later stages of exercise and reported decreased perceptions of
fatigue, indicating that the consumption of a carboh ydrate-electr olyte beverage
during intermi ttent sports is adv antageous (145).
Strength and Power Sports
Carboh ydrates are also an essential source of energy used during resistance
training and therefore in strength and power sports. Resear ch studies using a
series of different weightl ifting protocols found that participants used a
significant amount of muscle  glycogen (78), though this is notably lower than
what is typical ly seen for power –endur ance or intermi ttent high-intensi ty sports.
Most of these studies had participants perform just a few sets of exercises.
Therefore, athletes who perform in strength and power competi tions or sports,
or in positions that rely on muscle strength and power (e.g., hammer throwers
and offensive linemen in American footbal l), could deplete their muscle glycogen
stores to a level that affects performance. Furthermor e, starting with already low
carboh ydrate stores will increase muscle breakdown (76). Strength and power
athletes can maintain their glycogen stores, which may decrease muscular
629
fatigue in slow-twitch fibers and possibly lead to better performance, by
supplementing wi th carboh ydrate bef ore and during competi tion (47).
During-Competition Food and Fluid
Recommendations
Due to large variations in sweat rates and electr olyte concentr ations, athletes should measur e
weight changes during training and competi tion in specific weather condi tions and develop
individual ized hydration strategies based on this information (120). During prolonged activity in hot
weather , the Institute of Medicine recommends sport drinks containing 20 to 30 mEq of sodium
(460-690 mg with chloride as the anion) per liter, 2 to 5 mEq of potassium (78-195 mg) per liter,
and carboh ydrate in a concentr ation of 5% to 10% (2).
Hydration guidance for children and adolescents consists of 5 to 9 fluid ounces (148-266 mL) of
cold water or a flavored salted beverage or sport drink depending on their weight. For example,
children or adolescents weighing 40 kilograms (88 lb) should drink 5 fluid ounces (148 mL) and
those weighing 60 kg (132 lb) should drink 9 fluid ounces (266 mL) every 20 minutes during
practice, even if they do not feel thirsty (30, 37, 106). Aerobic endur ance athletes should consume
28 to 144 grams of multiple types of carbohydrates together , such as sucrose, fructose, glucose, or
maltodextrin, each hour during pr olonged aer obic endur ance activi ty (32, 34 , 66, 137).
Postcompetition Nutrition
The postcompeti tion meal helps athletes rehydrate, replenish glycogen stores,
and repair muscle tissue. Therefore, what they consume in the time period soon
after training or competi tion helps optimiz e adaptations as well as prepare their
body for the next bout of activity. This time frame has been referred to as a
garage door of opportuni ty because the athlete’ s body is primed to assimi late
nutrients and also because this previously assumed anabolic window  is
actual ly much longer than was original ly thought (11). Each athlete’ s
postcompeti tion needs vary based on the sport he or she plays, intensi ty during
play, amount of time played, the individual’ s weight and age, and probably the
person’ s sex. Howev er, much more resear ch has been conducted with male
subjects as opposed to females; therefore, recommendations are not broken out
based on sex due to a lack of suf ficient data in f emales.
After competi tion, athletes should replace fluid and electr olyte losses. If time
permi ts, normal meals, snack s (provided they contain some sodium), and water
will restore fluid and electr olyte losses. More salt can be added to foods when
sweat sodium losses are substantial (1, 120). Athletes can choose a
carboh ydrate-electr olyte sport drink or plain water alongside foods that contain
sodium chlorid e (or they can salt their foods) since sodium is essential for
helping the body retain fluid (83, 120, 125). Rehydration strategies should be
individual ized as much as possible. Athletes competing in weight -class sports
such as wrestling and mixed martial arts may deliberately dehydrate themselv es
630
to make weight and attempt to rehydrate before competi tion, though short time
periods betwee n weighing and competing may mean starting competi tion in a
dehydrated state, leading to poor perf ormance and heal th risks.
Aerobic Endurance Events
After prolonged aerobic endurance events, it is important to replenish
carboh ydrate stores before the next training session or competi tion (whichev er
comes first) and to aid in immune system function and consume enough protein
to build and repair muscle. Glycogen synthesis occurs in two distinct phases. The
first phase is independent of insulin and lasts 30 to 60 minutes, and glycogen
synthesis occurs rapidly . The second phase lasts several hours, and glycogen
synthesis occurs at a much slower pace. Glycogen synthesis occurs at a rapid
rate when large amounts of carboh ydrate, 1.0 to 1.85 grams per kilogram body
weight per hour, are consumed immediately after exercise or competi tion and at
regular interv als every 15 to 60 minutes thereafter for up to 5 hours (61). For
some athletes, though, it may be difficult to ingest carboh ydrate quanti ties at the
upper end of that range. Though athletes may be able to fully replenish their
glycogen stores right away or over the course of a 24-hour period after a long
training session, this is not necessari ly the case after competi tion. Strenuous
aerobic endur ance events that result in measur able muscle damage, such as the
marathon, lead to delayed glycogen resynthesis even if an athlete consumes a
higher -carboh ydrate diet, possibly due to either metabol ic disturbance or
mechanical damage to muscle cel ls (12, 124).
Though athletes are often told that they need to eat carboh ydrate
immediately after they finish competing, resear ch shows that this is not always
necessary; they may be able to wait 2 hours after finishing a glycogen-depleting
event before eating carboh ydrate, although this may not necessari ly be optimal.
In a study examining the rate of glycogen resynthesis, five high-gly cemic meals
were given to athletes over the course of a 24-hour period after a 2-hour -long
glycogen-depleting bout of cycling. One group received the first three meals over
the 4-hour period after exercise, while the second group received the first three
meals at regular 2-hour interv als starting 2 hours after they finished over the
first 6 hours after exercise. The rate of glycogen resynthesis was the same
between groups after 8 hours and after 24 hours (103). Therefore, athletes who
have more than 24 hours to recover can likely wait before eating after exercise
and replace their glycogen over the 24-hour time period after exercise as long as
they consume an adequate amount of carboh ydrate, though they may not
receive the same systemic recovery benefi ts beyond glycogen replenishment.
Howev er, athletes who train two or three times a day or have less than 24 hours
to recover may want to consider eating or drinking a high-carboh ydrate meal
631
immediately after finishing their event and at regular interv als thereafter to
quickly r eplenish gly cogen stor es.
Because prolonged aerobic endur ance exercise breaks down muscle tissue,
protein should be included in the aerobic endur ance athlete’ s posttraining meal
to help start muscle building and repair, which may attenuate posttraining and
postev ent muscle soreness (85). Consuming protein after training has another
benefi t: It increases the rate of glycogen storage if carbohydrate intake is less
than 1.2 grams of carboh ydrate per kilogram body weight per hour (61). In a
randomiz ed, controlled trial, 18 elite orienteers partic ipated in 13 exercise
sessions during one week. Half of the orienteers (the PRO-CON group) ingested
a protein drink before (0.3 g per kilogram body weight) and a protein-
carboh ydrate drink (0.3 g protein per kilogram body weight + 1 g carboh ydrate
per kilogram body weight) after training. The other half of participants consumed
an isocaloric carboh ydrate-only beverage before and after exercise (CHO). Diet
was kept consistent throughout the study (15%/63%/22%
protein/carboh ydrate/fat) except for the addition of the supplements. The basic
diet plus supplements provided 3 grams of protein per kilogram body weight per
day and 8.3 to 9.3 grams of carboh ydrate per kilogram body weight per day in
the PRO-CON group; the CHO group consumed 1.8 grams of protein per
kilogram body weight per day and 8.8 to 10.8 grams carboh ydrate per kilogram
body weight per day. A 4-kilometer (2.5 miles) run test was performed at the
beginning and end of the study and 2 hours after participants consumed a
standar dized breakfast. PRO-CON significantly improved performance and
reduced markers of muscle breakdown, while CHO did not improve performance.
Howev er, it is not clear from this study if the timing of protein made the
difference or the increased total daily intake of protein in the PRO-CON as
compar ed to the CHO gr oup (48).
Other resear ch does suggest that protein is important after aerobic endur ance
exercise. For instance, a single-bl ind, randomiz ed, triple-cr ossover design was
used to assess how different doses of a protein–leucine blend affected
myofibrillar protein fractional synthetic rate (FSR; muscle protein synthesis) in 12
aerobic endur ance-tr ained men after 100 minutes of high-intensi ty cycling
(performed 3 hours after a standar dized breakfast; diet the day before the test
was standar dized based on calorie needs and provided the same percentage of
carboh ydrate, protein, and fat for each subject). Cyclists consumed 70 g/15
g/180 g/30 g protein/leucine/  carboh ydrate/fat, or 23 g/5 g/180 g/30 g, or 0 g/0
g/274 g/ 30 g (contr ol) in four servings during the first 90 minutes of a 240-
minute (4-hour) recovery period. The lower -protein, lower -leucine supplement
(23 g/5 g/180 g/30 g) increased FSR by 33% ± 12% compared to the control
group, while additional protein and leucine (70 g/15 g/180  g/30 g) increased FSR
632
by 51% ± 12% compar ed to the control group. Though no significant differences
were noted between the two protein and leucine groups, both fared better than
the placebo group, indicatin g that protein is important after a long, tough
workout (118) . Given different workouts, exercise completed in a fasted or
unfasted state, and different doses of protein (10-96 g) used in other studies,
the precise minimum dose of protein needed to maximiz e FSR after aerobic
endur ance exercise is not clear (21, 57). Additional ly, it is not clear if maximizing
FSR in the time period immediately after aerobic endurance exercise will
translate to improved performance over time. And finally, the ideal time period
after aerobic endurance training during which protein should be consumed is not
clear and may depend on whether training was completed in a fasted or
unfasted state as well as on total daily protein intake. However, one study found
that delaying protein intake after aerobic endur ance exercise by as little as 3
hours blunts i ts anabol ic effects (77).
High-Intensity Intermittent Sports
Because athletes who participate in intermi ttent high-intensi ty sports—such as
basketball, hockey, and soccer—may play more than one game per day,
sometimes with just a few hours in between tournament games, immediate
recovery after a game is imper ative for performance in their next game. And
when competing in sports that involve prolonged high-intensi ty intermi ttent
activity, such as soccer, American footbal l, field and ice hockey, rugby, and
tennis, athletes  may significantly reduce their muscle glycogen stores, leading to
muscular and cogni tive fatigue (13). Fully replacing muscle glycogen before a
subsequent bout of exercise or competi tion may prolong  time until fatigue and
improve performance. In a study designed to mimic a soccer game, Nicholas and
colleagues had six males complete the same exercise test separ ated by 22 hours
on two consecutiv e days—75  minutes of a prolonged, intermi ttent, high-intensi ty
shuttle run test after which they completed as many 20 meter (22 yd) shuttles as
possible (each shuttle alternated between jogging and sprinting). Subjects were
assigned to one of two diets for the 22-hour recovery period: a recovery diet
including 10 grams of carboh ydrate per kilogram body weight or an isocaloric
diet with more protein and fat than their normal daily diet. Intermi ttent running
capaci ty improved after the higher -carboh ydrate diet as compared to the higher -
calorie condi tion with more protein and fat (94). Also, Balsom and colleagues
found that male study subjects performed significantly more work in both short-
term (<10 min) and prolonged (>30 min) high-intensi ty intermi ttent exercise
sessions after consuming a high- versus low-carboh ydrate diet for the 48-hour
period bef ore the ex ercise sessions (13).
633
High-intensi ty intermi ttent sports can lead to some degree of muscle damage
depending on many factors including the time and intensity of play and body
size. Studies show that consuming protein after exercise helps decrease some
markers of muscle damage (42). And though postex ercise carboh ydrate intake
can affect performance in a subsequent event or training session, particularly
when sessions are close together in time, the addition of protein will likely not
affect performance in a subsequent bout of exercise during the 4-hour recovery
period f ollowing the ini tial ev ent or ex ercise session (85).
Strength and Power Sports
Athletes in strength and power sports rely on both blood glucose and glycogen
for energy during competi tion. Because a single bout of resistance training can
lead to significant reductions  in glycogen (78) and decreases in glycogen can
impair force production and isometric strength while accentuating muscle
weakness, it is imper ative that these athletes restore glycogen levels before their
next bout of exercise (47). During the recovery period after strength and power
competi tions, athletes should focus on consuming higher -glycemic carboh ydrates
immediately after exercise if they must compete or train again over the course of
the 24-hour period after the initial training session or competi tion. The amount
of carbo hydrate they need to fully replenish glycogen stores depends on many
factors, including intensi ty and the time spent competing, their overall body
weight and muscle mass, their preexercise meal (and state of glycogen stores
before competi tion), and whether they consumed carboh ydrate during the
competi tion. In a crossover study, after an overnight fast, eight men who
completed 6 sets of single-leg  knee extensions at 70% of the 1RM, until 50% of
full knee extension was no longer possible, deplete d glycogen levels by
approximately 29%. Within 6 hours of the completion of training, they restored
up to 91% of their preexercise levels after consuming 1.5 gram of carboh ydrate
per kilogram body weight immediately after the resistanc e training session and
again 1 hour later. Howev er, when study subjects consumed water only
immediately after training and again 1 hour later, they barely restored their
muscle gly cogen content to 75% of pr eexercise lev els (104).
Net protein balance  depends on both muscle protein synthesis and
breakdown. And though carboh ydrates have no effect on muscle protein
synthesis, they help attenuate acute protein breakdown resulting from resistance
exercise. The increase in protein breakdown likely depends on the resistance
stimulus, the person’ s overall nutrition intake, and dietary intake before and
during training  or competi tion. One study in untrained young men found that
acute protein breakdown increased by 51% ± 17% after a bout of resistance
training (16). In another study, the rate of both mixed muscle protein fractional
634
synthesis rate (muscle protein synthesis) and fractional breakdown rate
(breakdown) were measur ed after a bout of either concentric or eccentric
exercise in four untrained men and four untrained women. The rate of synthesis
increased significantly above resting levels by 112% in the 3-hour period after
exercise, 65% over the 24-ho ur period after exercise, and 34% over the 48-hour
period after exercise. Muscle breakdown also increased by 31% and 18% in the
3- and 24-hour periods after exercise yet returned to baseline by 48 hours after
exercise (110). Relatively small amounts of carboh ydrate, somewher e between
30 and 100 grams, can sufficiently reduce muscle protein breakdown (18, 43).
Although muscle protein breakdown has a role in overall protein balance, muscle
protein synthesis pla ys a much bigger r ole in o verall protein balance (43).
Supplementing with protein after a muscle-damaging bout of resistance
training increases acute muscle protein synthesis. Varying amounts of protein
have been used after resista nce training to stimulate muscle protein synthesis,
though it appears that 20 to 50 grams (providing about 8.5 g-20 g of essential
amino acids) of a high-qual ity, high-leucine, fast protein (one that leads to a
rapid rise in amino acids in the bloodstr eam) in younger individuals may
maximal ly stimulate muscle protein synthesis, while 40 grams or more may be
necessary in older adults (59, 109). Rice protein is an intermediate-speed
leucine-poor protein (though the rise in leucine in the bloodstr eam appears
quickly after consumption of rice protein); larger doses of rice protein effectively
stimulate muscle protein synthesis to the same extent as a higher -quality protein
when matched for leucine content (67). Therefore, the leucine content of the
protein, and possibly the speed of leucine delivery, appears to be the
determining factor for acute changes in maximal stimulation of muscle protein
synthesis. A protein dose that contains 2 to 3 grams of leucine or 0.05 grams of
leucine per kilogram body weight will effectively stimulate muscle protein
synthesis in y ounger adul ts (96, 102, 136).
In addition to the acute increase in muscle protein synthesis, consistently
supplementing with protein after resistance training led to small to moder ate
increases in muscle hypertr ophy over time compar ed to condi tions in which
subjects were not given protein supplements (27, 122). Only one study to date
has directly examined the relationship between acute measur es of muscle
protein synthe sis and hypertr ophy due to resistance training. In this study 23
young men who were recreational ly active but had not participated in a
resistance training exercise program in at least a year were tested for initial
strength and resting and postex ercise rates of muscle protein synthesis. Then
they participated in a 16-week linear resistance training program consisting of
two days of lower body (e.g., leg press, leg extension, leg curl, and calf press)
and two days of upper body (e.g., chest press, shoulder press, seated row, lat
635
pulldown, biceps curl, triceps extension) exercises performed first thing in the
morning after an overnight fast. After exercise each day and at breakfast on
nontraining days they consumed a nutrition drink contai ning 30 grams of milk
protein, 25.9 grams of carboh ydrate, and 3.4 grams of fat. The study authors
found no relationship betwe en the acute rise (6 hours posttraining) in muscle
protein synthe sis due to exercise training and the nutrition drink provided and
muscle hypertr ophy. Howev er, the authors also noted that changes in muscle
protein synthesis with training were not uniform between study subjects;
therefore, though acute changes in muscle protein synth esis are important for
muscle hypertr ophy, they are not the sole factor that predicts a person’ s
potential to increase muscle growth (86). Thirty grams of milk protein, as used in
this study, provides an estimated 24 grams of casein, 6 grams of whey protein,
and a total of 2.8 gr ams of leucine (139).
Concurrent Training
Exercise interference is a concept suggesting that aerobic endur ance exercise,
when combine d with resistance training (back -to-back sessions), blunts gains in
strength comp ared to resistance training alone but results in improvements in
aerobic endur ance performance (148). While interest in concurr ent training-
based resear ch has increased over time, nutrition recommendations for
concurr ent training are often based on isolated studies examining the impact of
nutrition interv entions on aerobic endur ance or resistance training alone. The
consumption of carboh ydrate after aerobic endur ance exercise and before lifting
can help suppr ess skeletal muscle breakdown. Also, given the impact of protein
intake after aerobic endur ance exercise on muscle protein synthesis, as well as
the resear ch suggesting that protein intake during prolonged (>2 h) resistance
training supports greater rates of muscle protein synthesis during exercise
compar ed to a carboh ydrate control, athletes should consider consuming protein
after aerobic endur ance exercise, before lifting, or during their lifting session if
performing aer obic endur ance ex ercise first (107).
Daily Protein Intake
While ingestio n of protein around training is beneficial for athletes to aid in
recovery and adaptation, this may have relatively little benefit if daily intake is
sufficient. For this reason, protein consumption with each meal represents an
ideal strategy to meet these needs and maintain a positive physiological
environment for athletes. Resistance training has the ability to increase muscle
sensitivity to amino acids for 24 to 48 hours after exercise whereas the anabol ic
effect of a meal lasts approximately 3 to 5 hours. For optimal muscle remodel ing,
experts suggest consuming at least 20 to 40 grams of protein per meal and
636
eating meals every 3 to 4 hours (81, 107) in order to facilitate meeting daily
protein tar gets.
The amount of data on muscle protein synthesis in children is limited because
invasive measur ement procedur es are required (17), and no studies have
examined muscle protein synthesis after training and postwork out protein
ingestion in healthy children. Howev er, one thing is clear with regard to children:
Due to size differences as well as the impact of insulin and calorie intake on
protein synthe sis, their per-meal protein intake targets will naturally be lower in
order to meet their protein needs (79), despite potential ly having higher relative
needs. F or mor e information about pr otein needs b y sport, see table 11.3 .
Nutrition for Various Performance Goals
Nutrition for Aerobic Endurance Performance and Recovery
•  Aerobic endurance athletes should aim to consume 8 to 10 grams of carboh ydrate during their
most demanding training phases or competi tion and 1.4 to 2.0 grams of protein per kilogram body
weight per da y throughout their tr aining.
•  Athletes who eat at least 4 hours before competi tion should include approximately 1 to 4
grams of carboh ydrate per kilogram body weight and 0.15 to 0.25 grams of protein per kilogram
body weight (131). If the precompet ition meal is consumed 2 hours before exercise, athletes
should aim for approximately 1 gram of carboh ydrate per kilogram body weight (120) and 0.15 to
0.25 gr ams of easi ly digestible pr otein per ki logram body weight.
•  Athletes should consume 28 to 144 grams of a mixtur e of multiple types of carboh ydrate (e.g.,
sucrose, fructose, and glucose or maltodextrin) per hour during prolonged aerobic endur ance
exercise to extend time unti l exhaustion and impr ove perf ormance (32, 34 , 66, 137).
•  During prolonged activity in hot weath er, athletes should consume sport drinks containing 20
to 30 mEq of sodium (460-690 mg with chloride as the anion) per liter, 2 to 5 mEq of potassium
(78-195 mg) per l iter, and carboh ydrate in a concentr ation of 5% to 10% (2).
•  After exercise, approximately 1.2 to 2.0 grams of carboh ydrate per kilogram body weight
should be consume d within 30 minutes after stopping the exercise. The addition of protein appears
to facilitate glycogen replenishment if carboh ydrate intake is below 1.2 grams per kilogram.
Additional ly, some, though not all, studies show that the addition of protein to carboh ydrate after a
workout may attenuate muscle breakdown and soreness and increase muscle protein synthesis.
The ideal amount of protein and the time period after exercise in which it should be consumed are
not clear based on the current body of literature and may depend on whether the exercise was
performed in the fed versus fasted state and on total calories consumed after a workout (44, 57,
85). Howe ver, as a gener al guidel ine, at least 20 to 40 grams of high-qual ity protein should also be
consumed within a 2-hour time period after aerobic endur ance exercise (sooner may be better,
though the exact time period has y et to be elucidated in the r esear ch) (77).
•  Glycogen stores should be replenished  after exercise and before the next bout of training. A
regular diet with sufficient carboh ydrate intake can restore glycogen over the course of a 24-hour
period. For faster glycogen synthesis , athletes should eat or drink a high-carboh ydrate meal
immediately after exercise and at regular interv als thereafter . This is especial ly important for
athletes who tr ain again less than 24 hours after their ini tial training session (61).
Nutrition for Strength
637
•  Athletes should consider supplementin g with carboh ydrate before and during competi tion to
maintain strength and minimiz e muscle breakdown (47). In gener al, strength or speed athletes
should consume 5 to 6 grams of carbohydrate per kilogram body weight per day during peak
training periods. As little as 30 grams of carboh ydrate after training may reduce muscle breakdown.
The ideal time period for carboh ydrate consumption after resistance training has yet to be fully
clarified; however, consuming carboh ydrate sooner (rather than waiting) may be more beneficial,
particularly i f training w as carried out in a f asted state (43).
•  Because low glycogen can impair muscle force, athletes should consume higher -energy
carboh ydrates imme diately following weightl ifting or strength and power competitions if they must
compete or train again over the course of the 24-hour period after their initial competi tion.
Otherwise, they can consume enough carboh ydrate over the course of the day to restore glycogen
levels bef ore the next bout of tr aining or competi tion (47 , 104).
•  In gener al, strength or speed athletes should consume 1.4 to 2.0 grams of protein per
kilogram body weight per day, even if their sport or training includes an aerobic endur ance
component. After resistance training, younger individuals should consume at least 20 to 50 grams
(providing about 8.5 to 20 grams of essential amino acids) of a high-qual ity, high-leucine protein
(2-3 g), while older adults should consume 40 grams or more to maximal ly stimulate muscle
protein synthesis in the acute time period after training (109). If the exercise was performed in a
fasted state (first thing in the morning  or more than 3 hours after the last protein-rich meal), the
protein should be consumed within 30 minutes after the end of the session; but if the exercise was
performed in a fed state (preexercise protein-rich meal or supplement), this postex ercise time
window ma y be consider ably longer (10).
•  Between 30 and 100 grams of high-en ergy carboh ydrates should be consumed after muscle-
damaging ex ercise to r educe muscle pr otein br eakdown (18, 43).
•  Adult athletes should eat meals containing at least 20 to 30 gr ams of a higher -leucine pr otein.
Nutrition for Hypertrophy
•  Ingestion of between 30 and 100 grams of energy-dense, moder ate to high glycemic index
carboh ydrates may be consumed after muscle-damaging exercise to help reduce muscle protein
breakdown (18, 43).
•  After resistance training, younger individuals should consume at least 20 to 50 grams
(providing about 8.5 to 20 grams of essential amino acids) of a high-qual ity, high-leucine protein
(>2-3 g), while older adults should consume 40 grams or more to maximal ly stimulate muscle
protein synthesis in the acute time period after tr aining (109).
•  Adult athletes should eat meals containing at least 20 to 40 grams of a higher -leucine protein
every 3 to 4 hours.
Nutrition for Muscular Endurance
•  Maintain adequate h ydration b y preventing w ater weight losses ex ceeding 2% of body weight.
•  During prolonged training or competi tion, consider a carboh ydrate-electr olyte beverage to
delay fatigue and impr ove perf ormance, particularly i f perf orming after an o vernight f ast (6, 142).
•  Fully replace gly cogen stor es bef ore the next tr aining session or competi tion.
•  Consume pr otein after tr aining or games to minimiz e muscle damage and sor eness (42).
TABLE 11.3  Sport-Specific Protein Needs
638
SportDaily protein
needs in grams
per kilogram
body weightSample daily
protein intakePostexercise protein
needsPostexercise
protein examples
Low to
moder ate
aerobic
endur ance
activity (e.g. ,
jogging,
triathlon)1.4-1.8 150 lb (68 kg)
individual:
1 cup (240 g)
higher -protein
Greek y ogurt
(18-22 g
protein)
Grilled chick en
sandwich (28 g
protein)
Spaghet ti with 4
oz (113 g)
meatbal ls (20 g
protein)
Salmon (6 oz
[170 g]) (34 g
protein)0.2-0.5 g per ki logram
body weight1 higher -protein
nutrition bar (20 g
protein)
1 cup (240 g)
higher -protein
Greek y ogurt (18-
22 g pr otein)
Elite aer obic
endur ance
athlete or one
who tr ains
intensely>1.6 140 lb (64 kg)
individual:
1 cup (240 g)
higher -protein
Greek y ogurt
(18-22 g
protein)
Grilled chick en
sandwich (28 g
protein)
Spaghet ti with 6
oz (170 g)
meatbal ls (30 g
protein)
95% lean beef
(4 oz [113 g])
(30 g pr otein)
1/2 cup low -fat
cottage cheese
(12 g pr otein)0.2-0.5 g per ki logram
body weight20 fl oz (591 mL)
1% mi lk or
higher -protein so y
milk (20 g
protein)
1 scoop whey
protein (20-25 g
protein)
American
footbal l1.6-2.2, though
likely at the
upper end of this
range f or those
playing at an
intense lev el240 lb (109 kg)
individual:
5 large eggs (30
g protein)
Roast beef
sandwich (28 g
protein)
8 oz (227 g)
grilled salmonNot clari fied b y resear ch;
therefore, athletes ma y
want to f ollow the
guidel ines f or resistance
training and consume a
minimum of 30 g of a
fast, high-qual ity,
leucine-rich (2-3 g
leucine) pr oteinTofu and berry
shake (1/2 cup
[125 g] tof u, 1
scoop so y protein
powder , 1/2 cup
[75 g] mix ed
berries) (23 g
protein)
639
SportDaily protein
needs in grams
per kilogram
body weightSample daily
protein intakePostexercise protein
needsPostexercise
protein examples
(45 g pr otein)
6 oz (170 g)
chicken thighs
with 1 cup (185
g) cook ed
quinoa (50 g
protein)
1 cup (240 g)
higher -protein
Greek y ogurt
(18-22 g
protein)
12 fl oz (355
mL) 1% mi lk
with 1 scoop
whey pr otein
(34 g pr otein)1 scoop whey
protein wi th 4
tbsp (32 g)
powder ed peanut
butter (38 g
protein)
Gymnastics Dietary r estriction
increases pr otein
needs up to 2.2
(if they r estrict
calories); no
studies
conducted on
gymnasts’ pr otein
needs105 lb (48 kg)
individual:
3 large egg
omelet wi th 1 oz
(28 g) cheese
(25 g pr otein)
5.3 oz (150 g)
Greek y ogurt
with 1 oz (28 g)
almonds and
1/2 cup (75 g)
berries (18 g
protein)
Chicken
shawarma wr ap
(4 oz [113 g]
grilled chick en,
1 whole wheat
pita, 2 tbsp [30
g] hummus [37
g protein])
3 oz (85 g)
shrimp wi th 1/2
cup (85 g) black
beans (29 g
protein)0.2-0.5 g per ki logram
body weight1 cup (210 g) low -
fat cot tage cheese
with 1/2 cup (75
g) pineapple
chunks (25 g
protein)
2 scoops (60 g)
plant-based
protein powder , 1
cup (237 mL)
almond mi lk, 1
tbsp (15 g) chia
seeds (28 g
protein)
Team sports Likely 1.6-2.0 g,
depending on the
sport and165 lb (75 kg)
individual:
Follow the sample
daily meal plan f or~0.2-0.5 g per kg per
hour (minimum of 20 g)1 scoop of whey
protein in 8 fl oz
(237 mL) skim
640
SportDaily protein
needs in grams
per kilogram
body weightSample daily
protein intakePostexercise protein
needsPostexercise
protein examples
intensi ty of
exercisethe el ite aer obic
endur ance athlete
above and add
5 oz (142 g)
chicken thighs
with 1 cup (185
g) cook ed
quinoa (43 g
protein)milk (30 g
protein)
Weightl ifting 1.6-2.0 212 lb (96 kg)
individual:
4 large eggs
omelet wi th 1 oz
(28 g) cheese
(30 g pr otein)
6 oz (170 g)
grilled salmon
with 1 cup (185
g) cook ed
quinoa (42 g
protein)
6 oz (170 g)
sirloin steak (46
g protein)
6 oz (170 g)
shrimp , 1/2 cup
(85 g) black
beans, 2 soft
taco siz e whole
grain torti llas
(58 g pr otein)Studies ha ve used 20-70
g protein in close
tempor al proximity to
resistance ex ercise,
though a pr otein
containing appr oximately
2-3 g leucine per serving
of protein is
recommended1 scoop egg or
whey pr otein (or 2
scoops plant -
based pr otein)
with 4 tbsp (32 g)
powder ed peanut
butter (38 g
protein)
Wrestling 2.2, though
dietary r estriction
increases pr otein
needs190 lb (86 kg)
individual:
Follow the sample
daily meal plan f or
the weightl ifter, but
add the f ollowing:
1 cup (210 g)
low-fat cot tage
cheese, 1/2 cup
(75 g) pineapple
chunks (25 g
protein)0.2-0.5 g per ki logram
(minimum of 20 g of
high-qual ity protein)1 scoop of whey
protein in 8 fl oz
(237 mL) skim
milk (28 g
protein) or 2
scoops of whey
protein in w ater
(30-44 g pr otein)
641
Nutrition Strategies for Altering Body
Composition
Athletes who want to alter their body composi tion typical ly need to gain muscle,
lose body fat, or both. Although there are some scenarios (typical ly in those with
eating disorders) in which an athlete may need to gain both muscle and fat, this
section f ocuses on gaining muscle and losing body f at.
The first step toward altering body composi tion involves estimating calorie
needs (though calorie  is the commo n term, the technical term is kilocalorie ).
The number of calories an athlete needs each day depends on a number of
factors includin g genetics, body weight, body composi tion, training program, and
age. Chi ldren and adolescents also need calories f or growth and dev elopment.
Basal metabolic rate (BMR ) is by far the largest contributor to total energy
expendi ture, accounting for approximately 65% to 70% of daily energy
expendi ture (63, 114). It is a measur e of the calories required for maintaining
normal body functions such as respiration, blood circulatio n, and gastrointestinal
and renal processing. Basal metabol ic rate and resting metabolic rate (RMR)
are often used interchang eably, though they are slightly different. Basal
metabol ic rate is measur ed after an overnight fast (12-14 h without food) with
the subject resting supine and motionless but awake (2, 40). Resting metabol ic
rate is often used instead of BMR due to the ease of measur ement (an overnight
fast is not required), yet it is 10% to 20% higher than BMR due to increased
energy expen diture resulting from recent food intake or physical activity
completed earlier in the day. Several factors influence BMR and RMR, particularly
fat-free mass, which explain s approximately 70% to 80% of the difference in
RMR among individuals (93, 115, 138). Other factors include age, nutrition
status, genetics, and differences in endocrine functioning (such as hypo- or
hyperth yroidism).
The second-lar gest component of an individual’ s energy requirement is the
energy expended in physical activity. Of all the components, it is the most
variable among individuals. The number of calories expended through physical
activity increases with the frequency , intensi ty, and duration of the training
program, as well as nontraining daily activity (e.g., washing a car or doing
housework). Typical ly, 20% to 30% of total daily energy expendi ture is from
physical activity, though this figure may be consider ably higher in athletes (63,
114). The highest energy costs are seen in aerobic activities performed by large
athletes for long periods of time, whereas the lowest energy costs are associated
with ski ll and power sports perf ormed b y smal ler athletes.
642
The thermic effect of food, also known as diet-induced thermogene sis, is
the increase in energy expendi ture above the RMR that can be measur ed for
several hours following a meal. The thermic effect of food includes the energy
cost of digestio n, absorption,  metabol ism, and storage of food in the body. The
thermic effect of food accounts for approximately 10% to 15% of total calories
burned each da y (63, 114).
Many different equations can be used to calculate calorie needs, including the
Cunningham equation and equations by the Institute of Medicine (IOM), which
are prediction equations. The various IOM equations take sex, body weight,
height, age, and physical activity levels into account to predict the estimated
energy requirement (EER) (138). RMR can then be multiplied by an activity
factor from 1.2 (sedentary) to 1.9 (heavy physical activity) to predict energy
requirements (50). Howev er, these equations do not take into account how
muscle mass affects RMR (90). The Cunningham equation takes fat-free mass
(FFM) into ac count to estimate RMR, making i t mor e appl icable to athletes (135).
RMR = 500 + 22 (FFM in kg)
After using the Cunningham equation to estimate RMR based on FFM, an activity
factor can be used to estimat e total daily energy expendi ture. Instead of using a
basic activity factor, the strength and condi tioning professional may choose to
use metabol ic equiv alents (MET values), an estimate of caloric expendi ture
during activity. One MET is the energy equiv alent of sitting quietly; therefore, the
greater the intensi ty of ex ercise, the higher the MET v alue (5).
Another , more laborious method that can be used by very motiv ated athletes
is to record dietary intake for a minimum of three consecutiv e, representativ e
days during a period of stable body weight. The individual’ s daily energy
requirement is assumed to equal the average number of calories consumed each
day. The pitfall of this metho d is that recording food intake usually alters normal
eating habits and people do not always accurately record their food intake (55,
121). Finally, a very simple method for quickly assessing calorie needs is
presented in table 11.4  (24).
Weight Gain
An athlete’s ability to gain weight depends on numer ous factors; the ones that
can be controlled include diet and training. The off-season should be used as a
time to make dietary changes that focus on weight gain since athletes do not
have the pr essures of competi tion on their mind.
If athletes increase their calorie intake dramatical ly and consistently , they
could gain more fat than they would like. A gener al guideline, which should be
adjusted based on the athlete, is to consume approximately 500 additional
calories per day in order to gain weight (113). Eating  larger portion sizes,
643
increasing meal frequency , and focusing on choosing calorie-dense foods are all
strategies that can help an athlete gain weight. In addition to increasing total
calorie intake, athletes should ensur e that they are eating enough protein to
maximiz e gains in lean body mass: 1.6 to 2.2 grams per kilogram body weight
per day. Increasing an athlete’ s protein intake may make weight gain tough,
given the profound effect that protein has on satiet y, as well as the increased
thermic effect of feeding associated with higher -protein diets. Howev er,
overfeeding protein is advantageous if the athlete can sustain the diet. In a
randomiz ed, controlled overfeeding study, 16 healthy adults lived in a metabol ic
ward for eight weeks and were overfed a diet contain ing low (5% of total
calories), normal (15% of total calories), or high (25% of total calories) protein.
The subjects who consum ed the normal- and high-pr otein diet stored
approximately 45% of the excess calories as lean body mass, whereas those on
the low-protein diet stored 95% of the excess calories consumed as body fat
(20). In addition to making dietary changes, athletes who want to gain weight
should consider supplementing with creatine monoh ydrate, a supplement that
safely and ef fectively incr eases lean body weight (73).
TABLE 11.4  Physical Activity Level Values and Activity
Coefficients
Physical activity
level (PAL)* ExamplesPhysical activity coefficient
(males/females)
Sedentary ( ≥1.0 to
<1.4)Common activi ties of dai ly living (ADLs) 1.00/1.00
Low activ e (≥1.4 to
<1.6)ADLs and 30-60 min of dai ly moder ate activi ty 1.11/1.12
Active (≥1.6 to
<1.9)ADLs and  ≥1 h of dai ly moder ate activi ty 1.25/1.27
Very activ e (≥1.9 to
<2.5)ADLs and  ≥ 1 h of dai ly moder ate activi ty and 1
more h of vigor ous activi ty or 2 h of moder ate
activity1.48/1.45
*PAL = ratio of energy expendi ture to basal daily energy expendi ture (“1.0” means total energy expendi ture
equals basal dai ly ener gy expendi ture).
Reprinted by permission from L.M. Burke and E.S. Rawson, “Fueling and Nutrition,” in NSCA ’s Essentials of
Sport Science, edited for the National Strength and Condi tioning Association by D.N. French and L. Torres
Ronda (Human Kinetics, 2022), 366.
Finally, though  athletes may know their energy and protein needs, putting this
knowledge into practice can be perplexing. Therefore, regular nutrition
counsel ing (or coaching) by a sports dietitian or sports nutritionist with an
advanced degree is a recommended strategy for facilitating greater weight gain.
644
A study of 21 elite athletes with heavy training loads, who were randomiz ed to
receive nutrition counsel ing or to eat ad libitum, showed that over the course of
the 8- to 12-week weight gain period, the group receiving dietary counsel ing had
greater total and lean body mass gains during the intervention and after 12
months; this means that the group receiving nutrition counsel ing continued to
benefi t from the nutrition guidance for several months after counsel ing ended
(41).
Weight (Fat) Loss
Athletes partici pating in a variety of sports may need to lose body fat to improve
aspects of performance such as speed or aerobic endurance. Plus, regulating
body weight may give certain athletes a mental advantage going into
competi tion (108). Additional ly, maintaining or making weight is a recurring
aspect of sports that include weight classes, weight limitations, or judging based
on appear ance such as weightlifting, wrestling, boxing, lightweight crew, and
gymnastics.
Despi te diet books on the bestseller lists, there is no ideal diet that works for
everyone. Instead, studies show that a variety of types of diets, including low-
carboh ydrate and low-fat diets, result in weight loss as long as the people
following them are consumin g fewer calories than needed to maintain weight.
Additional ly, there appears to be no difference between the amount of weight
loss on a low-carboh ydrate as compar ed to a low-fat (and therefore higher -
carboh ydrate) diet (19, 39). Total calorie intake and dietary adher ence, the
ability to stick with a diet over time, are the two most important factors that
predict successful weight loss. Howev er, a good portion of weight loss during
dieting may come from muscle (144). Further , because muscle protein synthesis
is an energy-expensiv e process, during times of dieting caloric restriction may
decrease muscle protein synthesis. Athletes who want to maintain muscle and
lose body fat while dieting should consume about 1.8 to 2.7 grams protein per
kilogram body weight per day (or approximately 2.3-3.1 g protein per kilogram
fat-free mass per day) in addition to maintaining a moderate energy deficit of
approximately 500 calories per da y (91).
There is no one ideal diet. Instead, athletes need to choose a
dietary approach based on whether it is safe for them, contains
enough prote in to meet their needs, and fits their lifestyle so that
they can easily adhere to it.
To be sustainable in the long term, diets should be individual ized; be easy to
adher e to; and take into account lifestyle habits, medical history (including
645
diabetes, insulin resistance, other diseases, and medical concerns), diet history ,
and food preferences while providing all of the nutrients an athlete needs to train
and perform optimal ly. Additional ly, resear ch shows that ongoing behavior
therapy and support can impr ove long-lasting r esults (80).
Overweight and Obesity
Overweight and obesity , both of which  reflect an accumulation of excess body
fat, increase a person’ s risk of morbidi ty from hypertension; dyslipidemia;
coronary artery disease; gallbladder disease; stroke; type 2 diabetes; sleep
apnea; osteoa rthritis; respiratory problems; and endometrial, breast, prostate,
and colon cancers (92). Obesi ty is categoriz ed as a disease and affects 34.9% of
adults and 17% of children in the United States (96). At a population level,
overweight and obesity are typical ly classified based on a body mass index
(BMI)  of 25 to 29.9 kg/m2 and ≥30 kg/m2, respectiv ely (table 11.5). Howev er,
this evaluativ e approach may have very little applicability to athletes. In reality,
BMI is a measur e of excess weight as opposed to excess body fat (92) because it
cannot distingu ish between excess fat and muscle or bone mass (26). Therefore,
BMI can overestimate body fat in athletes and others with muscular builds and
under estimate body fat in older persons or those who have lost muscle mass
(95). Finally, age, sex, ethnici ty, and muscle mass affect the association between
BMI and body fat. Strength and condi tioning professionals  should use other more
accurate measur es of body composi tion such as skinfolds, air displacement
plethysmogr aphy (ADP), multifrequency bioelectrical impedance analysis, or
dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry  (DXA) in athletes with more muscle than
their age- and sex -matched counterparts (74).
The causes of obesity are complex and include an interaction of genes and
environment, involving social, behavioral, cultural, metab olic, physiological, and
genetic factors . Howev er, many treatment options are effective, including dietary
therapy, altering physical activity patterns, behavior therapy techniques,
pharmacother apy, and surgery. Some patients and clinicians emplo y a
combination of these treatments. The initial goal for weight loss in overweight
and obese individuals should  be 10% of initial weight within six months (92).
Additional ly, target body weight  can be calcula ted using body fat percentage
and FFM (i.e., target body weight = fat free mass/[100 percent desired percent
body fat]). Where desired, percent body fat is based on measur ement type (e.g.,
ADP, DXA, skinfolds) and team, sport, and position-speci fic normativ e body
composi tion data.
Low-Carbohydrate Diets
646
The populari ty and effectiveness of low-carboh ydrate diets may have less to do with cutting
carboh ydrates (in healthy individuals) and more to do with a tempor ary decrease in water weight,
cutting calories, and increasing protein intake. When people significantly reduce their carboh ydrate
intake, they deplete their glycogen stores (carboh ydrate stored with three to four parts water) and
therefore quickly drop pounds from water weight. Once carboh ydrates are reintroduced into the
diet, they can r apidly gain the weight back (71).
Over time, howev er, low-carboh ydrate diets may work for some people because of the
consumption of increased levels of protein. Protein increases feelings of fullness (satiet y) in a dose-
dependent manner —the more protein consumed at one sitting, the greater its effect on satiet y.
Howev er, at this time the “optimal dose” for maximum satiet y remains unclear . Protein also
increases the thermic effect of feeding . More calories are burned during digesting and processing
protein than carboh ydrate or fat. And finally, protein helps spare metabol ically active lean muscle
tissue during weight loss. This is important because muscle burns a few more calories at rest than
fat does, and over time this can affect body weight. Plus, more muscle may mean that a person
can tr ain har der and ther efore burn mor e calories during tr aining (91).
Though cutting carboh ydrates may be detrimental for a number of competi tive athletes,
particularly during precompeti tion and competi tion phases, it is a very effective approach for
someone with insulin resistance (a condition that leads to the buildup of glucose in the blood
because the body does not use insulin effectively) as well as type 2 diabet es. It may also be an
effective appr oach f or overweight and obese individuals (51, 54 , 149).
No single body fat measur e should be used to assess health, disease, or
disease risk (26). Overweig ht and obesity combined with other risk factors,
including high blood pressure, high low-densi ty lipoprotein cholester ol, low high-
density lipoprotein cholester ol, high triglycerides, high blood glucose, physical
inactivi ty, family history of prematur e heart disease, or cigarette smoking,
increase a person’ s risk f or heart disease (92).
Although all obese individuals share the trait of excess body fat, they cannot
be treated homogeneously . They must be screened for coexisting illnesses such
as diabetes, orthopedic problems, cardiac disease, psychological disorders such
as binge-eating disorder  or depression, social and cultural influences, and
readiness for change. Obese athletes who are mandated to lose weight (e.g., by
a physician) pose a special challenge because losing weight is dictated by an
external source and is not an internal ized goal. Weight loss takes a great deal of
dedication from within the individual, and these athletes may need to work
closely with a mental health professional or register ed dietitian to help them
meet their goal.
TABLE 11.5  Classification of Adult Weight by Body Mass Index
(BMI) and Associated Disease Risk
647
ClassificationObesity
classBMIa
(kg/m2)DISEASE RISKb RELATIVE TO NORMAL
WEIGHT AND WAIST CIRCUMFERENCE
Men <102 cm (<40
in)
Women <88 cm (<35
in)Men >102 cm (>40
in)
Women >88 cm (>35
in)
Severely
underweight<16.5
Underweight <18.5
Normal 18.5-24 .9
Overweight 25.0-29.9 Increased High
Obesi ty I 30.0-34 .9 High Very high
II 35.0-39.9 Very high Very high
Extreme obesi ty III ≥40 Extremely high Extremely high
Note: Increased waist circumference can also be a marker for increased risk even in persons of normal
weight.
aBMI may overestimate fat in athletes and others with muscular builds and under estimate fat in older
persons and others who have lost muscle. To estimate BMI using kilograms and meters, use this equation:
body weight (kilograms) / height (meters)2. To estimate BMI using pounds and inches, use this equation:
body weight (pounds) / height (inches)2 × 703.
bDisease risk f or type 2 diabetes, h ypertension, and car diovascular disease.
Reprinted from NHLBI Obesi ty Education Initiative Expert Panel on the Identification, Evaluation, and
Treatment of Obesi ty in Adul ts (1998).
Rapid Weight Loss
Though there is no uniform defini tion in the literature, rapid weight loss gener ally
refers to quick weight loss, faster than can be achiev ed by lowering calorie
intake and increasing exercise, in a short period of time (38). Athletes may use a
variety of techniques to cut weight quickly to compete in a desired weight class,
meet a weight goal set by their coach, or improve performance. Potential ly
danger ous weight loss techniques may include fasting, fad diets, voluntary
dehydration  (diuretics, sauna, water and salt manipulation, wearing multiple
layers of clothing), excessiv e spitting, self-induced vomiting, laxativ e abuse, and
inappr opriate or ex cessiv e use of thermogenic aids (38).
Athletes who attempt to lose too much weight too quickly  may lose lean body
mass, feel fatigued, experien ce headaches or mood swings, put their training
and performance in jeopar dy, and suffer from several potential ly serious side
effects. These include dehydration, heat illness, muscle cramping, fatigue,
dizziness, suppr essed immune system functioning, hormone imbalances,
hyperthermia, reduced muscle strength, decreased plasma and blood volume,
648
low blood pressure, electr olyte imbalances, kidney failure (diuretic abuse),
fainting, and death (in extr eme cases) (38).
The strength and condi tionin g professional should be able to recogniz e the
signs and symptoms associated with rapid weight loss techniques and refer
athletes to the appropriate professional while also comm unicating concerns to
the rest of the coaching staff. In addition, the strength and condi tioning
professional may want to consider documenting the steps he or she has taken to
assist the athlete (for good record keeping and to prevent liability) while also
working with a medical doctor or register ed dietitian to set appropriate weight
goals after body composi tion, dieting, medical, and eating disorder history have
been taken into account. Some athletes may need to reconsider which weight
class they are competing in if they cannot make weight without putting their
health or perf ormance in jeopar dy.
649
Relative Energy Deficiency in Sport (RED-S)
Relative energy deficiency in sport (RED-S)  encom passes various
physiological dysfunctions resulting from low energy availability (LEA), where an
athlete’ s energy intake does not match the energy expended during exercise.
This mismatch affects metabo lic rate, menstrual function, bone health, immuni ty,
protein synthesis, and cardiovascular health, among others. This phenomenon
was initially recogniz ed in 2014 with the internatio nal RED-S consensus
statement (88) and has continued to encompass additional resear ch. For more
details on the impl ications of RED- S, see these pr evious papers (25, 89).
LEA is quanti fied by energy availa bility (EA), calculated as energy intake
minus exercise energy expendi ture, relative to fat-free mass (FFM). Optimal EA
for healthy function is around 45 kilocalories per kilogram FFM per day, while
severe perturbations can occur below 30 kilocalories per kilogram FFM per day
(25, 88). LEA adversely affects various systems, including the endocrine system,
leading to disruptions in hormonal balance, particularly in female athletes, and
possibly in males, though male athletes appear to be more physiological ly
resilient at lower EA values. LEA may be one of the strongest indicators of injury
risk for athletes (133), with oligomenorrheic and functional hypothalamic
amenorrheic (FHA) athletes reporting higher percentages of severe
musculosk eletal injuries resulting in greater durations of time lost from sport
(134).
Menstrual dysfunction, including amenorrhea , is a common consequence of
sustained LEA in female athletes, due to the impact on the hypothalamic –
pituitary–gonadal (HPG) axis. Chronic LEA also compr omises bone health,
leading to decreased bone miner al density and increased risk of bone stress
injuries, particularly in sports with high energy demands. Metabol ic changes,
including decreased RMR, and hematological alterations, such as iron deficiency ,
are also associated with LEA. Growth and development, cardiovascular function,
gastrointestinal health, and immune function are also affected, particularly at
very low levels of LEA and over longer periods of time. Psychological implications
include increased risk of depression, eating disorders, and impair ed stress
management.
Performance- wise, LEA can impair recovery, muscle function, and glycogen
storage, affecting physical and psychological capaci ty, training quality, and injury
risk (89). Howe ver, despite these associations, direct evidence of LEA’s impact on
sport performance is limited. Studies on elite athletes suggest that LEA may
impair sport performance indirectly by acutely affecting fuel storage and use
(132), reducin g training volume, and increasing risk of illness (35, 36). Yet
further resear ch with robust protocols is needed to fully understand the acute
650
and chronic effects of LEA on athletic performance. Recognizing and addressing
LEA is crucial for optimizing  athlete health, performance, and long-term well-
being. Health care practitioners and coaches should be vigilant for signs of LEA
and its associated health implications, implementing strategies to mitigate risks
and support athletes in achieving optimal energy balance and performance
outcomes.
651
Feeding and Eating Disorders
Eating disorders, including binge-eating disorder, anorexia nervosa, and
bulimia nervo sa, are serious mental health disorders that can affect both men
and women, appear at any point in life, and increase risk of mortal ity. Those with
eating disorders have a high prevalence of other psychiatric disorders, including
anxiet y disorders, mood disorders such as depression, impulse-contr ol disorders,
and substance abuse disor ders (49, 58).
Studies show an increased  prevalence of both disordered eating  and
eating disorders  in athletes compared to controls (45, 128, 151). In particular ,
athletes in sports with weight classes such as wrestling, those in sports that
emphasiz e leanness such as cross country running, and aesthetic sports such as
gymnastics may be more prone to disordered eating and eating disorders (45,
128, 151). Signs of disordered eating may include restrictiv e eating; fasting;
skipping meals ; and taking diet pills, laxativ es, or diuretics. Howev er, those with
disordered eating do not meet the full diagnostic criteria for an eating disorder
(45).
Eating disorders are multifactorial diseases and, as such, require a
multidiscipl inary team approach. The strength and condi tioning professional must
be aware of signs and symptoms of an eating disorder and have a referral
network in place so athletes can get the psychological, medical, and nutrition
help they need f rom experts who work wi th eating disor ders.
Anorexia Nervosa
Anorexia nervosa is characteriz ed by a distorted body image and an intense fear
of gaining weight or becoming fat, leading those with this disease to excessiv e
calorie restricti on and severe weight loss (8). Those with anorexia nervosa also
put a great deal of emphasis  on their weight or shape yet do not recogniz e the
seriousness of their illness. Also, people with anorexia nervosa typically engage
in ritualistic behaviors including repeated weighing, cutting food into small
pieces, and car efully portioning their f ood (92).
Two subtypes fall under anorexia nervosa. The restricting type does not
regularly binge eat or purge, while the binge-eating or purging type regularly
engages in binge eating or pur ging.
The incidence peaks in the early 20s for both males and females, and the
lifetime prevalence in females ages 10 to 39 years ranges from 0.21% to 0.89%,
and in males ages 10 to 39 years it ranges from 0.19% to 0.67% (143).
Estimates based on data model ing reveal that 14% of females with anorexia
nervosa and 28.2% of males seek treatment (143). It is important to note that
among all mental health disorders, anorexia nervosa has the highest mortal ity
652
rate (49, 143). For more information about anorexia nervosa, the reader is
encour aged to read the American Psychiatric Association’ s Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disor ders, Fi fth Edi tion (DSM- V) (8).
Symptoms of Anorexia Nervosa
Signs and Symptoms of Anorexia Nervosa
Extremely r estricted eating
Intense and ex cessiv e exercise
Extreme thinness (emaciation)
A relentless pursui t of thinness and un willingness to maintain a heal thy weight
Intense f ear of gaining weight
Distorted body image or sel f-image
Denial of the seriousness of low body weight
Serious Health Consequences of Anorexia Nervosa
Thinning of the bones (osteopenia or osteopor osis)
Mild anemia
Muscle w asting and weakness
Delayed pubert y
Severe constipation
Low blood pr essure
Slowed br eathing and pulse
Damage to the structur e and f unction of the heart
Feeling tir ed all the time
Infertility
Brain damage
Multiple or gan failure
Reprinted from National Institute of Mental Health, “Eating Disorders: What You Need to Know,” U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services, National Institutes of Health, retrieved August 7, 2025, https://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/publications/eating-
disorders.
Binge-Eating Disorder
Previously categoriz ed under “eating disorder not otherwise specified,” binge-
eating disorder has its own category in the DSM- V (8). Binge-eating disorder is
characteriz ed by repeated episodes, occurring at least once a week for a period
of three weeks, of uncontr olled binge eating (eating significantly more food in a
short period of time than most people would eat under the same circumstances)
(55). The binge-eating episodes are associated with three or more of the
following:
Eating much mor e rapidly than normal
653
Eating unti l feeling uncomf ortably f ull
Eating lar ge amounts of f ood when not f eeling ph ysical ly hungry
Eating alone because of f eeling embarr assed b y how much one is eating
Feeling disgusted wi th onesel f, depr essed, or v ery gui lty afterw ard (55)
Because binge-eating episodes are not followed by purging, as is the case
with bulimia nervosa, people  with binge-eating disorder are often overweight or
obese. The lifetime prevalence for males ages 10 to 39 years is estimated to be
0.69% to 1.93% and 1.08%  to 3.14% in females of the same age, with peak
onset in the early to mid-20s (143). A lifetime prevalence of binge-eating
disorder is associated with morbid obesity (BMI >40). Over the course of a
lifetime, it is estimated that approximately 30% of males and 29.7% of females
with binge-eating disorder receive treatment (143). Binge eating is associated
with significant physical and psychological problems. Additional ly, people with
binge-eating disorder may feel embarr assed, guilty, or disgusted with their
behavior and ma y attempt to hide their beha vior b y eating alone (55).
Bulimia Nervosa
Bulimia nervosa is characteriz ed by recurrent consumption of food in amounts
significantly greater than would customari ly be consumed in a discrete period of
time—f or example, an entire pizza and a half-gallon of ice cream, plus a package
of cookies. Purging follows episodes of binge eating and may include one or
more of the following: self-induced vomiting, intense exercise, laxativ e use, or
diuretic use. The bingeing and purging occur at least once a week for a period of
three months (55). People with bulimia nervosa feel a lack of control over their
eating during binge episodes and are more likely to be normal weight as
opposed to underweight, are unhapp y with their weigh t and body, and fear
weight gain. Average age of onset for bulimia nervosa is in the early 20s, and
the lifetime prevalence is 0.08% to 0.30% in males ages 10 to 39 and 0.56% to
1.7% in females of the same age range. Approximately 15.7% of males and
17.7% of females are estimated to receive treatment (143). For more
information about bul imia, the r eader is encour aged to r efer to DSM- V (84).
Avoidant/Restrictive Food Intake Disorder
Avoidant/r estrictiv e food intake disorder (ARFID) is an eating or feeding
disturbance, including appar ent lack of interest in eating or food; avoidance
based on the sensory characteristics of food; or concern about aversive
consequences of eating. This disorder is manifested by persistent failure to meet
appropriate nutritional or energy needs associated with one (or more) of the
following (55):
654
Significant weight loss (or failure to achiev e expected  weight gain or
faltering gr owth in chi ldren)
Significant nutri tional deficiency
Dependence on enter al feeding or or al nutri tional supplements
Marked interf erence wi th psy chosocial f unctioning
The disturban ce is not better explained by lack of available food or by
associated cul turally sanctioned pr actice.
The eating disturbance does not occur exclusiv ely during the course of
anorexia nervosa or bulimia nervosa, and there is no evidence of a disturbance
in the w ay in which one’ s body weight or shape is experienced.
The eating disturbance is not attributable to a concurr ent medical condi tion or
not better explained by another mental disorder. When the eating disturbance
occurs in the context of another condi tion or disorder, the severity of the eating
disturbance exceeds that routinely associated with the condition or disorder and
warrants addi tional cl inical at tention (55).
Pica
People with pica eat nonnutri tive substances for a period of at least one month.
Common nonnutri tive substances include clay, laundry starch, ice, cigarette
butts, hair, or chalk (68). Those with pica may have electr olyte and metabol ic
disorders, intestinal obstruction, wearing away of tooth enamel, and
gastrointestinal problems, among other issues. Testing for anemia is
recommended since pica is associated wi th iron deficiency (68).
Rumination Disorder
Rumination involves chewing, reswallowing, or spitting of regurgitated food. To
be classified as having this disorder, one must displa y this behavior, unrelated to
any medical condi tion, for at least one month. Rumination  disorder can occur
alongside other eating issues or disor ders (55).
Symptoms of Bulimia Nervosa
Signs and Symptoms of Bulimia Nervosa
Vomiting
Taking laxativ es
Exercising ex cessiv ely
Fasting
Serious Health Consequences of Bulimia Nervosa
Chronical ly inflamed and sor e throat
655
Swollen sal ivary glands in the neck and ja w area
Worn tooth enamel, incr easingly sensi tive and deca ying teeth
Acid r eflux disor der and other gastr ointestinal pr oblems
Intestinal distr ess and irri tation
Severe deh ydration
Electr olyte imbalance
Reprinted from National Institute of Mental Health, “Eating Disorders: What You Need to Know,” U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services, National Institutes of Health, retrieved August 7, 2025, https://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/publications/eating-
disorders.
Eating Disorders: Management and Care
It is not the responsibi lity of the strength and condi tioning professional to treat
or diagn ose an eating disorder. It is his or her ethical responsibi lity to assist the
athlete in attaining the proper diagnosis from a qualified physician and treatment
from a qualified treatment team. Therefore, strength and condi tioning
professionals should be mindf ul of the symptoms of each eating disorder as well
as signs of disordered eating . Keep in mind that abnorm al eating patterns and
amenorrhea alone are not indicativ e of an eating disorder. A professional who is
experienced and qualified in diagnosing and treating eating disorders should be
contacted when an athlete’ s beha vior is concerning.
Eating Disorder Resources
National Eating Disorders Association
www.nationaleatingdisor ders.org
International Association of Eating Disorders Professionals
www.iaedp .com
The Renfrew Center Foundation
www.renfrewcenter .com
National Association of Anorexia Nervosa and Associated Disorders
www.anad .org
The Meadows Ranch
www.meadowsr anch.com
The strength and conditioning professional is not responsible for
treating eating disorders but instead should be aware of the
symptoms associated with an eating disorder and refer athletes to
the appropriate professional.
656
Conclusion
The primary role of nutrition in strength and condi tioning is to support athletic
performance. A gener al understanding of nutrition principles and applications is
essential for strength and condi tioning professionals so that they can provide
consistent, accurate informat ion to their athletes while also being able to identi fy
the potential signs and symptoms of an eating disorder. And though pre-,
during-, and postcompeti tion nutrition can lead to better performance, a
nutritional ly sound daily diet should be emphasiz ed as well for overall health,
greater tr aining adaptations, and perf ormance.
KEY TERMS
amenorrhea
anabol ic window
anorexia nerv osa
basal metabol ic rate (BMR)
binge-eating disor der
body mass index (BMI)
bulimia nerv osa
calorie
carboh ydrate-electr olyte (carboh ydrate) drink
carboh ydrate loading
creatine kinase
diet-induced thermogenesis
disordered eating
dual-ener gy X-ray absorptiometry (D XA)
eating disor ders
energy availability (EA)
exogenous
isocaloric
kilocalorie
obesity
net pr otein balance
precompeti tion meal
relative ener gy deficiency in sport (RED- S)
resting metabol ic rate (RMR)
target body weight
voluntary deh ydration
657
STUDY QUESTIONS
  1.  Which of the following is a key strategy for precom petition nutrition in
athletes?
  a.  consuming high-f at and high-fiber f oods to pr omote satiet y
  b.  choosing carboh ydrates and fluid to maximiz e ener gy and h ydration
  c.  avoiding pr otein intak e before competi tion to pr event muscle sor eness
  d.  trying new f oods during pr actice sessions to minimiz e stomach
discomf ort
  2.  Which of the following statements about nutrition during aerobic
endur ance ev ents and intermi ttent-activity sports is ac curate?
  a.  Pr otein intak e has no impact on perf ormance or muscle damage.
  b.  Athletes should a void consuming carboh ydrates during pr olonged
exercise to pr event stomach discomf ort.
  c.  Pr oper h ydration and carboh ydrate intak e are essential to maintain
performance and pr event deh ydration.
  d.  Sport drinks wi th a carboh ydrate concentr ation higher than 10% ar e
ideal f or quick absorption.
  3.  What are the recommen ded amounts of carboh ydrate and protein intake
for aerobic endur ance athletes during their most demanding training
phases or competi tion?
  a.  carboh ydrate: 1.5 to 2.0 gr ams per ki logram body weight per da y;
protein: 1.40 to 2.0 gr ams per ki logram body weight per da y
  b.  carboh ydrate: 8 to 10 gr ams per ki logram body weight per da y;
protein: 1.40 to 2.0 gr ams per ki logram body weight per da y
  c.  carboh ydrate: 1.5 to 2.0 gr ams per ki logram body weight wi thin 30
minutes after ex ercise; pr otein: 10 to 40 gr ams wi thin a 32-hour time
period after aer obic endur ance ex ercise
  d.  carboh ydrate: 28 to 140 gr ams per hour during pr olonged aer obic
endur ance ex ercise; pr otein: 1.5 to 2.0 gr ams per ki logram body
weight wi thin 30 minutes after ex ercise
4. What are the recommended macronutrient intakes for strength or speed
athletes during peak tr aining periods?
a. carboh ydrate: 1.4 to 1. 7 grams per ki logram body weight per da y;
protein: 5 to 6 gr ams per ki logram body weight per da y
b. carboh ydrate: 30 to 100 gr ams immediately f ollowing weightl ifting or
strength competi tions; pr otein: 20 to 30 gr ams of high-leucine pr otein
every 3 to 4 hours
c. carboh ydrate: 5 to 6 gr ams per ki logram body weight per da y; protein:
1.4 to 1.8 gr ams per ki logram body weight per da y
658