# Chapter 12: Performance-Enhancing Substances and Methods

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

**PDF Pages:** 659--728

CHAPTER  12
PERFORMANCE-ENHANCING
SUBSTANCES AND METHODS
Bill I. Campbell, PhD, and Nathaniel D.M.
Jenkins, PhD
The authors would like to acknowledge the significant contributions of Jay R. Hoffman
and Jef frey R. Stout to this chapter .
After completing this chapter, you will be able to
provide r eliable and up-to-date inf ormation to athletes on the
risks and benefi ts of perf ormance-enhancing substances,
including anabol ic ster oids, selectiv e andr ogen r eceptor
modulators, and peptides;
understand the ef ficacy and adv erse ef fects of o ver-the-counter
dietary supplements mark eted to athletes f or enhancing sport
and ex ercise perf ormance;
determine which perf ormance-enhancing supplements ar e
beneficial f or str ength and power perf ormance, aer obic
endur ance perf ormance, or both; and
distinguish between those perf ormance-enhancing supplements
that mimic the ef fects of hormones in the body and those that
improve perf ormance thr ough some other means.
659
Athletes who choose to use performance-enhancing substances do
so with the hope that they will augment their training adaptations
and ultimately improve their sport performance (181). Ideally,
performance-enhancing substances also support the health of the
athlete and are within the ethical and stated guidel ines of the
athlete’ s sport. Because of the ethical consider ations relating to
unfair advantage during competi tion and the potential for adverse
events, most athletic governing bodies have gener ated a list of
substances that are banned from national and international
competi tion. Athletes caught using such substances can be
suspended or forced to forfeit their medals or both. In situations in
which the athlete tests positive for a banned substance on repeated
occasions, he or she risks a lifetime ban on participation in the given
sport. Howev er, numer ous nutritional supplements and ergogenic
aids are permissible and are frequently used by athletes to maximiz e
performance enhancement. Often the use of these substances is
promoted on the basis of unfounded claims (181). Another concern
that athletes need to be aware of with the use of dietary
supplements is the risk of unintended doping originating from
contaminated products. The presence of undeclar ed compounds in
the composition of dietary supplements is a serious concern (131).
Thus, it is imper ative that the athlete become informed about the
legality of these substances, understand the potential risks
associated with consumption, and know whether scienti fic resear ch
supports the claims (i.e., the efficacy of the product). The strength
and condi tioning professional can greatly assist athletes in this
regard by giving them relevant information related to these issues,
as well as by referring them to nutrition special ists. Although an
ergogenic aid can be any substance, mechanical aid, or training
method that improves sport performance, for the purposes of this
chapter the term r efers speci fically to pharmacologic aids.
Athletes may try to gain a competi tive advantage by using
supplements that are repute d to be ergogenic but are not banned,
or they may knowingly use banned substances in the belief that they
660
can stay ahead of the drug testers (181). A consequen ce may be
that athletes who would normal ly refrain from using these
substances may feel pressured to use them just to stay abreast of
their competi tors. Howev er, athletes who are well informed can
confidently ignore useless and possibly harmf ul products despite
what their fellow athletes claim. It may also be possib le to steer
athletes away from the use of banned drugs if they are aware of the
risks to their health and safety and are aware that compe titors who
cheat run a high risk of being detected.
Athletes should focus on using appropriately periodiz ed strength
and conditioning methods and sound nutritional practices designed
to enhance performance. If these two factors are addressed, at that
point the athlete can consider using sport supplements or ergogenic
aids. It is important that athletes seek guidance from appropriate
professionals to make sure that what they are considering is both
legal and ef ficacious.
An athlete’s first priority should be to apply sound
principles of training, including adequate nutrition,
before using  any nutritional supplement or ergo genic
aid. Before purchasing or consuming a product, an
athlete should seek guidance from qualified
professionals to make sure the choice is legal, safe, and
effective.
661
Types of Performance-Enhancing
Substances
This chapter discusses two categories of performance-enhancing
substances: hormones and the drugs that mimic their effects and
dietary supplements. Certain hormones, such as testoster one, play
an integr al role in the adaptiv e response to strength and
condi tioning activities; others, such as epinephrine, are important for
energy mobilization during training. These and several other types of
hormones are covered more extensiv ely in the next part of this
chapter . The distinction between a performance-enhancing drug and
a dietary supplement is not intuitively obvious. For example,
caffeine, which is found in many beverages such as coffee, is
categoriz ed as a drug. The distinction between a drug and a dietary
supplement affects whether a product meets United States Food and
Drug Administr ation (FDA) approval for safety and effectiveness. If a
product is not classified as a drug or advertised as having
therapeutic value, FDA regulations concerning its sale are relatively
relaxed. This means that any manuf acturer can introduce a new
dietary supplem ent to the market without special approval and that
the FDA will not investigate its safety or effectiveness unless a health
risk is brought to the agency ’s attention (76). The FDA’s definition of
a drug encompasses substan ces that change the body’s structur e or
function. This includes substances that stimulate hormone  secretion.
Additional ly, if a compound is administer ed differently from the way
in which f oods would be consumed, i t may be classi fied as a drug.
The distinction between a drug and a dietary
supplement is linked to FDA approval for safety and
effectiveness.
Gener ally, dietary suppl ements  are highly refined products that
should not be confused with a food. They may not have any positive
662
nutritional value; hence they are not referred to as nutritional
supplements . Carboh ydrate loading to bolster glycogen stores before
an athletic competi tion is consider ed sport nutrition, as is a tablet of
a single purified amino acid (not promoted for medicinal properties);
howev er, the tablet is consider ed a dietary supplement.
The FDA regulates both finished dietary supplement products and
dietary ingredients. Dietary supplements are regulated under a
different set of regulations than those covering conventional foods
and drugs (see FDA websi te at www.fda.gov/Food
/Dietarysupplements /default.htm). In 1994, the U.S. Congr ess
passed a seminal piece of legislation known as the Dietary
Supplement Health and Education Act (DSHEA). Under DSHEA,
manuf acturers and distributors of dietary supplements are prohibited
from marketing products that are adulterated or misbr anded. This
means that these firms are responsible for evaluating the safety and
labeling of their products before marketing to ensur e that they meet
all the requirements of DSHEA and FDA regulations. Companies can,
howev er, make claims about effects on the body’s structur e and
function as long as the manuf acturers can show that the statements
are truthful and not misleading; this is a much less stringent
requirement than f or effectiveness claims made f or drugs.
Definition of Products That Can Be Sold as
Dietary Supplements
The following points define which products can be sold as dietary suppleme nts in
the Uni ted States:
A product (other than tobac co) intended to supplement the diet that contains
one or mor e of the f ollowing dietary ingr edients:
A vitamin
A miner al
An herb or other botanical
An amino acid
A dietary substance for use by humans to supplement the diet by
increasing the total dietary intak e
663
A concentr ate, metabol ite, consti tuent, extract, or combination of any
ingredient l isted abo ve
The product must also be labeled as a dietary supplement, such that the
label must include the term dietary supplement  or equivalent and therefore
cannot also be advertised for use as a conventional food or as the sole item
within a meal or diet.
Ergogenic substances are usually banned from athletic
competi tion when a consensus is reached that they may provide an
unfair competi tive edge or pose a significant health risk. This
prohibition does not need to be based on conclusiv e proof that a
substance does anything advantageous; it simply represents an
agreement among administr ators or clinicians that this may be the
case. As mentioned previously , every sport’s governing body
publishes its own list of banned substances. Probably  the most
widely recogniz ed international organization regulatin g doping
worldwide is the World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA), which oversees
the doping controls and establ ishes the banned substances list for
the International Olympic Commi ttee (61). Each country has an
affiliated agency (e.g., United States Anti-Doping Agency  [USADA],
United Kingdom Anti-Doping [UKAD], and Sport Integri ty Australia
[SIA]) that oversees anti-doping controls for Olympic sports.
Additional ly, in some countries these organizations also oversee
doping controls for professional sports (i.e., UKAD and SIA). The
prohibited substances list is standar dized and updated by WADA
each year. While the WADA list is the international standar d, other
organizations, such as collegiate and professional sports in the
United States, have different prohibited substances lists as well as
penal ties for doping. Regardless of which organization  regulates
doping controls, it is incumbent upon the athlete, sport coach,
strength and condi tioning professional, and all support staff to
ensur e that they are compl iant with their respectiv e organization’ s
anti-doping policies. Figure 12.1 lists the National Collegiate Athletic
Association banned drug classes (updated in 2023). This list is used
by many universities in the United States and is subject to change
664
on a yearly basis. Check with your institution or governing body for
the list speci fic to y our si tuation.
Some of the substances are illegal under governmental statute as
well. For example, in the United States anabol ic steroids are a Class
III substance, which makes their possession, for other than medical
use, punishable with a maximum penal ty of one year in prison and a
minimum US$1,000 fine if this is the individual’ s first drug offense.
The maximum penal ty for trafficking (to deal or trade in something
illegal) is no more than a 10-year prison sentence and a fine of no
more than US$500,000 if this is the individual’ s first felony drug
offense. If this is the second felony drug offense, the maximum
period of imprisonment and the maximum fine both double. While
these penal ties are for federal offenses, individual states have also
implemented fines and penal ties for illegal use of anabol ic ster oids.
665
Hormones
A variety of endogenously produced hormones are used to enhance
athletic performance. The most commonly used hormone is
testosterone , along with its synth etic derivatives (115).
Testoster one is the primary androgen hormone that interacts with
skeletal muscle tissue. In addition to testoster one, a variety of other
hormones produced by the body have been emplo yed by athletes as
ergogenic aids to stimulate the testes to produce testos terone, or
they have anabol ic propertie s in themselv es; growth hormone is an
example. Erythr opoietin, which is secreted by the kidneys,  is used to
stimulate red cell production for enhancement of aerobic endur ance
performance, and catecholamines such as adrenaline (or
epinephrine), which have metabol ic and nervous system effects, are
often used to enhance weigh t loss and to provide greater arousal for
performance.
Anabolic Steroids
Anabolic steroids  are the synthetic (human-made) derivatives of
the male sex hormone testoster one. Physiological ly, elevations in
testoster one concentr ations stimulate protein synthesis, resulting in
improvements in muscle size, body mass, and strength (25).
Additional ly, testoster one and its synthetic derivatives are
responsible for the development and matur ation of male secondary
sex characteristics (i.e., increase in body hair; mascul ine voice;
development of male pattern baldness, libido, sperm production, and
aggressiveness). These androgenic  properties include the full
development of the primary sexual characteristics of the male. Thus
it is more accurate to refer to synthetic derivatives of testoster one as
anabol ic-androgenic steroids. Howev er, they are also referred to as
androgens , androgenic ster oids, or anabol ic ster oids.
Figure 12.1 National Collegiate Athletic
666
Association banned drug classes.
A. Stimulants
Amphetamine (Adderall), Caffeine (Guar ana), Cocaine, Dimeth ylbutylamine
(DMBA; AMP), Dimethylhexylamine (DMHA; Octodrine), Ephedrine, Heptam inol,
Hordenine, Lisdexamf etamine (Vyvanse), Methamphetamine, Methylhexanamine
(DMAA; Forthane), Methylphenidate (Ritalin), Mephedr one (bath salts), Modafini l,
Octopamine, Pheneth ylamine (PEAs) and its derivatives, Phentermine, Synephrine
(bitter or ange).
Exceptions : Phen ylephrine and Pseudoephedrine ar e not banned.
B. Anabolic Agents
Androstenedione, Boldenone, Clenbuter ol, Clostebol, DHCMT (Oral Turinabol),
DHEA, Drostanolone, Epitrenbolone, Etiocholanolone, Methandienone,
Methaster one, Nandrolone (19-nortestoster one), Oxandr olone, SARMS [Ligandrol
(LGD-4033); Ostar ine; RAD140; S-23], Stanoz olol, Stenbolone, Testoste rone,
Trenbolone.
C. Beta-Blockers (Banned for Rifle Only)
Atenolol, Metopr olol, Nadolol, Pindolol, Pr opranolol, Timolol.
D. Diuretics and Masking Agents
Bumetanide, Canrenone (Spironolactone), Chlorothiazide, Furosemide,
Hydrochlor othiazide, Pr obenecid, T riamter ene, T richlormethiazide.
Exceptions : Finasteride is not banned.
E. Narcotics
Buprenorphine, Dextr omoramide, Diamorphine (heroin), Fentan yl and its
derivatives, Hydrocodone, Hydromorphone, Meperidine, Methadone, Morphine,
Nicomorphine, Oxy codone, Oxymorphone, P entaz ocine, T ramadol.
F. Peptide Hormones, Growth Factors, Related
Substances, and Mimetics
Growth hormone (hGH), Human Chorionic Gonadotr opin (hCG), Erythr opoietin
(EPO), IGF-1 (colostrum; deer antler v elvet), Ibutamor en (MK -677).
Exceptions : Insulin, Synthroid and F orteo ar e not banned.
G. Hormone and Metabolic Modulators
Anti-Estr ogen (Fulvestrant), Aromatas e Inhibitors [Anastr ozole (Arimidex);  ATD
(andr ostatrienedione); Formestane; Letrozole], PPAR-d [GW1516 (Cardarine);
667
GW0742], SERMS [Clomiphene (Clomid); Raloxifene (Evista); Tamoxifen
(Nolvadex)].
H. Beta-2 Agonists
Albuter ol, Formoter ol, Higenamine, Salbutamol, Salmeter ol, Vilanter ol.
Note: The banned substance l ist on NCAA.or g is updated annual ly; readers
should check the websi te for a r ecent update. Also , the l ist is not exhaustiv e
and only r epresents some of the banned substances wi thin a particular drug
class. An y substance that is chemical ly/pharmacological ly related to one of the
above drug classes, ev en if it is not l isted as an example, is also banned.
Information about ingr edients in medications and nutri tional/dietary
supplements can be obtained b y contacting AXIS at 816-474-7321 or
axis.drugf reesport.com .
There is no complete l ist of banned substances. Do not r ely on this l ist to rule
out an y label ingr edient. Man y nutri tional/dietary supplements ar e contaminated
with banned substances not l isted on the label. It is the student -athlete’ s
responsibi lity to check wi th the appr opriate athletics staf f before using an y
substance.
Reprinted b y permission f rom National Col legiate A thletic Association, “2025-26
NCAA B anned Substances, ” last modi fied June 2025,  https:// ncaaor g.s3
.amaz onaws.com/ssi/substance /2025 -26/2025 -26NCAA _BannedSubstances .pdf.
Secretion of testoster one occurs primari ly in the intersti tial Leydig
cells in the testes. Although  several other steroid hormones with
anabol ic-androgenic properti es are produced in the testes (e.g.,
dihydrotestoster one and androstenedione), testoster one is produced
in far greater quanti ties. Testoster one and these other male sex
hormones are also secreted in significantly smaller amoun ts from the
adrenal glands (in men and women) and ovaries (in women). Many
of the ergogenic aids on the market today are precursors for
testoster one (i.e., androstenedione) and are discussed in more detail
later in this chapter .
Major Sport Organizations’ Lists of Banned
Substances
Major League Baseball
668
https:// img.mlbstatic .com/mlb-images /image /upload /mlb
/oqj0ztqx efst9pmkpbcl .pdf
Major League Soccer
https:// democr ats-judiciary .house .gov/sites/democr ats.judiciary .house .gov
/files/mlsconsti tution _0.pdf
National Collegiate Athletic Association
https:// ncaaor g.s3.amaz onaws.com/ssi/substance /2024 -25/2024 -25NCAA
_BannedSubstances .pdf
National Football League
https:// nflpaweb.blob.core.windows .net/websi te/PDFs /List-of-Prohibited-
Substances _PES_2022 .pdf
National Hockey League
Consistent wi th World Anti-Doping Agency (W ADA) f or both in-competi tion
and out -of-competi tion testing
USA Lacrosse
Consistent wi th WADA f or both in-competi tion and out -of-competi tion testing
www.usalacr osse.com/sites/default/files/documents /Safety/2021 -World-
Lacrosse-Anti-Doping -Code -Final .pdf
USA Powerlifting
Consistent wi th WADA f or both in-competi tion and out -of-competi tion testing,
with the ex ception that US A Powerl ifting does not enf orce
www.usapowerl ifting.com/usa-powerl ifting-anti-doping -rules /
US Tennis Association
Consistent wi th WADA f or both in-competi tion and out -of-competi tion testing
and the T ennis Anti-Doping Pr ogram
www.usta.com/en/home /about -usta/who-we-are/national /tennis -anti-doping -
-what-you-need -to-know .html#tab =tennisanti -dopingpr ogramme
World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA)
www.wada-ama.org/en/resour ces/world -anti-doping -code -and-international -
standar ds/prohibited-list
It was not until the 1930s that testoster one was isolated,
synthesiz ed, and subsequently investigated for its effects in humans
(24). The physiological changes that testoster one regulates have
made it one of the drugs of choice for strength and power athletes
or other athletes interested in increasing muscle mass (115).
Howev er, testoster one itself is a very poor ergogenic aid. Rapid
degradation occurs when testoster one is given either orally or
669
through injecta ble administr ation (24). Thus, chemical modification
of testoster one was necessa ry to slow the degradation process in
order to achiev e androgenic and anabol ic effects at lower
concentr ations and to provide effective blood concent rations for
longer periods of time (24). Many derivatives of testoster one were
developed from 1940 to 1960 (186); once these modifications
occurred, anabol ic steroid use through either oral or injectable
administr ation became possible. In recent years, anabo lic steroid
administr ation via creams and gels for topical applications and skin
patches has increased in populari ty, primari ly for medical reasons.
Howev er, the most commonly used forms for administr ation in
athletes are oral and injecta ble forms (115). Examples of oral and
injectable anabol ic ster oids ar e listed in table 12.1 .
Dosing
Athletes typically use anabol ic steroids in a stacking  regimen, in
which they administer several different drugs simultaneously (167).
The rationale for stacking is to increase the potency of each drug via
an additive effect. That is, the potency of one anabol ic agent may be
enhanced when it is consumed simultaneously with another anabol ic
agent. Resear ch in this area is limited, and the efficacy of stacking
has not been proven one way or the other. Individuals use both oral
and injectable compounds. Most users take anabol ic steroids in a
cyclic pattern, meaning they use the drugs for several weeks or
months and alternate these cycles with periods of discontinued use
(167). Often users administer the drugs in a pyramid (step-up)
pattern in which dosages are steadi ly increased over several weeks
(115). Toward the end of the cycle, the athlete “steps down” to
reduce the likelihood of negativ e side effects. At this point, some
athletes discontinue the drug use or perhaps initiate another cycle of
different drugs (e.g., drugs that may increase endogenous
testoster one production, taken to prevent the undesir able drop in
testoster one concentr ations that follows the removal of the
pharmaceutical agents). One study showed that the typical steroid
670
regimen involved an average of 3.1 agents, with a typical cycle
ranging from 5 to 10 weeks (167). The dose that the athlete
administer ed was reported to vary from between 5 and 29 times
greater than physiological replacement doses (167). These higher
pharmacologic dosages appear necessary to elicit the gains that the
athletes desire. In a classic study on the dose–r esponse curve of
anabol ic steroids, Forbes (68) demonstr ated that the total dose of
anabol ic steroids has a logarithmic relationship to increases in lean
body mass; low doses produce only slight effects, but there is a
progressive augmentation of lean body mass with increasingly larger
doses. These results reinforce the athlete’ s philosoph y that if a low
dose is ef fective, mor e must be bet ter.
TABLE 12.1  Generic and Trade Names of Anabolic
Steroids Commonly Used by Athletes
Category and generic name Example trade names
ORALLY ACTIVE STEROIDS
Danaz ol Danocrine
Ethylestr enol Maxibol in
Fluoxymester one Halotestin
Ultandren
Android-F
Mester olone Proviron
Mestr anum
Methandr ostenolone Dianabol
Methyltestoster one Metandr en
Oreton meth yl
Android
Testered
Virolin
Oxandr olone Anavar
*These are generic categories of substances; many different preparations of each are
available.
671
Category and generic name Example trade names
Oxandrin
Oxymetholone Anadr ol-50
Stanoz olol Winstr ol
INJECTABLE STEROIDS
Boldenone undecylenate Equipoise
Parenabol
Dromostanolone Drolban
Methenolone enanthate Primobolan depot
Nandr olone esters* Deca-dur abolin
Durabolin
Dynabolan
Anabol
Testoster one esters* Andriol
Delatestryl
Depo-testoster one
Oreton
Restandol
Sustanon
Trenbolone acetate Finaject
Prabolan
TRANSDERMAL OR TOPICAL STEROIDS
Testoster one Androderm
Androgen
Testim
Testoderm
*These are generic categories of substances; many different preparations of each are
available.
Athletes typically use higher doses of the substances than are
prescribed for men with low testoster one levels. Methandr ostenolone
(Dianabol), for example, maintains normal secondary sexual
characteristics in hypogonadal men at a replacement dose of
672
approximately 15 milligrams per day; athletes have reported using
up to 300 milligrams per day (77). This orally active drug has not
been available for medical use in the United States for several
decades but is still available through black market sources.
Testoster one enanthate is a testoster one ester and is an injectable
steroid that is readily available in the United States and is used
clinically for some rare diseases and for replacement treatment. A
replacement dose is approximately 75 to 100 milligrams per week
administer ed every one to two weeks. Injectable steroids are
administer ed intramuscularly , typical ly by deep gluteal injections.
They are also more potent than oral steroids because of their route
of delivery and perhaps also because they do not require additional
modification to protect them from immediate metabol ism by the
liver. The injectable compou nds have a wide range of half-lives.
Among the testoster one esters, testoster one propionate remains in
the circulation  for approximately 1.5 days, whereas testoster one
buciclate lasts f or thr ee months after a single injection (18).
Who Uses Anabolic Steroids?
It is believed that athletes (particularly strength athletes) whose
goals are to improve athletic performance are the prima ry users of
anabol ic steroids. George J. Mitchell, a former United States senator ,
in the famous 2007 “Mitchell Report, ” stated that use of androgenic -
anabol ic steroids by Major League Basebal l players in the United
States was pervasive (41). Before this revelation of anabol ic steroid
use in athletes, earlier reports date back to the 1952 and 1956
Olympics, in which there were accounts of systema tic use of
androgens by the Soviet weightl ifting team (41). State-sponsor ed
anabol ic steroid use in other countries has also been documented. In
the former German Democ ratic Republ ic after the fall of the
communist government in 1990, classified documents revealed a
secret state program beginni ng in 1966 to improve national athletic
performance using androgens (41, 75). In the United States,
widespr ead use has also been reported in powerl ifters (51), National
673
Footbal l League players (117), and collegiate athletes (146).
Additional ly, a 2014 estimate indicated that between 2.9 and 4.0
million America ns have likely used anabol ic steroids at some point in
their lifetime (173). Evidence also indicates that many steroid users
are secretive, with more than 50% of users indicating that they have
never disclose d their use of anabol ic steroids to their physician
(176). Therefore, anabol ic steroid use is still prevalent and an
important concern among recreational and athletic populations, with
some estimates suggesting roughly 100,000 new users per year
(24). Although results of several surveys suggest that anabol ic
steroid use appears to have been declining over the last few decades
(213), anabol ic steroids are among the top sport issues today
because of r eported use in man y sports o ver time (73).
Strength athletes are not the only users of anabol ic steroids.
People outside organized sport use steroids to enhance appear ance
rather than performance (56). National surveys of male American
high school seniors showed that approximately 7% were using, or
had used, anabol ic steroids (12, 35). One-thir d of the admitted
steroid users were not involved in school-sponsor ed sports, and
more than one-fourth stated that their main reason for using
steroids was to improve appear ance as opposed to athletic
performance. Pope and his colleagues (172, 174) described a subset
of bodybuilders with an altered self-image who believed that they
looked small and weak even though they were large and muscular .
These individuals used ergogenic substances and weight training to
increase their body size. Pope calls this condi tion “reverse anorexia
nervosa”; it is also known as muscle dysmorphia . These
bodybui lders appear to be substantial ly different from competi tive
athletes in terms of their objectiv es, the substantial health risks that
some of them are willing to take, and their strategies of using
extremely large doses of anabol ic steroids. This phenomenon may
suggest why the most serious illnesses associated with steroid use
have occurred almost exclusiv ely in bodybui lders and not in other
steroid-using athletes (77).
674
Efficacy
The purported ergogenic benefi ts commonly attributed to anabol ic
steroid use are increased muscle mass, strength, and athletic
performance, particularly in sports requiring maximal strength levels.
When anabol ic steroids are taken at supraphysiologic doses, these
ergogenic benefi ts are realized (25). The degree and incidence of
these changes are variable, depending greatly on, among other
factors, the tr aining status of the individual (25).
Muscle Mass and Strength
One of the primary reasons athletes and nonathletes take anabol ic
steroids is to increase lean muscle mass and maximal strength. If
such improvements do occur, this will lead to better performance on
the field, with all other variables of athleticism held constant. When
anabol ic steroids are given in doses similar to those used by
recreational ly trained and competi tive athletes, increases  in muscle
protein synthes is are seen (98). These increases in protein synthesis
are likely responsible for the increases observ ed in lean body mass in
both recreational ly trained and competi tive athletes taking anabol ic
steroids (107, 210). Even when anabol ic steroids are administer ed to
normal adult men not engaged in intensiv e resistance training,
increases in body mass, including the nonfat component, are
observ ed (25, 69). The extent to which gains in lean body mass and
maximal strength occur with anabol ic steroid use has been reported
in the scienti fic literature as a case study (3). In this study, an adult
male international-lev el bodybui lder self-injected androgenic
hormones (at a dosage of 53 mg/da y) for a training period of one
year that included only a four-week abstinence from drugs in the
middle of the year. During this time, the bodybui lder was able to
gain about 7 kilograms (15 lb) of fat-free weight, increase the mean
fiber area of the vastus lateralis muscle by approximately 11% in six
months’ time, and significantly increase maximal strength. Despi te
these improvements in muscle mass and strength, the individual’ s
health status was negativ ely affected. Specifically, after drug
675
withdrawal, the subject experienced atrophic testicles  and low
luteinizing hormone, follicle-stimulating hormone, and testoster one
levels. High-d ensity lipoprotein (HDL) cholester ol was also
significantly lower ed, which indicates a higher risk for atherogenesis.
See more information on the health consequences of anabol ic
steroid use in the Adv erse Ef fects section.
For some time it was postulated that increases in body mass with
androgen use came from an increase in body water (107). An
increase in total body water is expected with an increase in muscle
mass, since water consti tutes a majori ty of the cellular weight;
howev er, it has been postula ted that anabol ic steroids may increase
water retention as well by increasing intersti tial and extracellular
volume. Although water retention may explain why not all of the
weight gain is sustained after cessation of anabol ic steroid use, this
issue is still not well understood. In a study of experie nced male
bodybui lders, an eight-week cycle of nandr olone decanoate (200
mg/week, intramuscularly) resulted in a significant 2.2-ki logram (4.9
lb) increase in body mass, a 2.6-kilogram (5.7 lb) increase in fat-free
mass, and a 0.4-ki logram (0.9 lb) decrease in fat mass, with no
change in hydration of fat-free mass (210). Additional ly, the
extracellular and intracellular water ratio was unaltered. Even after
six weeks of discontinued androgen use, the body mass of the
bodybui lders was still significantly greater than baseline levels (1.6
kg [3.5 lb] greater), yet no hydration changes were seen. The
increase in fat-free mass and possible reduction in fat mass may last
for several months after cessation of use (69) (figure 12.2). Thus,
athletes may derive a benefi t from steroid use even if they stop
taking the drugs long enough before competi tion to obtain a
negativ e drug test. This is why unannounced, year-round drug
testing of some elite athletes is important for the prevention of
unfair drug use.
676
FIGURE 12.2 Changes in lean body mass with anabol ic steroid administr ation and
following drug cessation.
Data from Forbes et al. (1992).
Athletic Performance
Initially, researchers examin ing the ergogenici ty of exogenously
administer ed anabol ic steroids were unable to see any significant
performance effects (74, 201). Consequently , the scienti fic and
medical comm unity sugges ted that anabol ic steroids had little
influence on athletic performance. This, howev er, was contrary to
anecdotal reports emanating from gyms and training centers that
showed that athletes experienced large improvements in strength in
response to using anabol ic steroids. On further examina tion of the
initial studies, several methodological flaws became appar ent.
Several of these studies used physiological doses, in contrast to the
suprapharmacologic doses that are typical ly taken by athletes self-
administering androgens. In essence, these subjects were shutting
down their own endogenou s production and replacing it with an
exogenous anabol ic steroid. Another flaw in some of these
investigations was the method of strength assessment. In several
studies, strength performance was evaluated using a mode of
677
exercise that was different from the training stimulus. This lack of
specificity likely masked any possible training effect. Additional ly,
several studies used subjects who had only minimal resistance
training experience (74, 201). When exogenous androgens have
been adminis tered to experienced resistance-tr ained athletes,
significant strength gains have been consistently reported (4, 107).
Strength gains in experienced  strength-tr ained athletes are gener ally
quite small relative to those seen in novice athletes, but when
strength-tr ained athletes use anabol ic steroids, their strength gains
may be two to three times  higher than those typical ly seen in
similarly tr ained athletes who ar e not supplementing (107 , 210).
The purported ergogenic benefits commonly attributed
to anabolic steroid use are increased muscle mass,
strength, and athletic performance, but these changes
depend on the training status of the individual.
Psychological Effects
Anabol ic steroid use is also associated with changes in aggression,
arousal, and irritability (152). The East Germans reportedly used
anabol ic steroids for this effect, delivering high doses to the central
nervous system  by taking steroids through the nose. The issue has
not been well studied, but anecdotal reports suggest that this
practice markedly increased aggressiveness and enhanced
performance among athletes (75). Elevations in arousal and self-
esteem may be a positive side effect for the anabol ic steroid user.
Increases in aggressiveness may also be perceived as a benefi t,
especial ly for athletes participating in contact sports.
Increased aggressiveness may not be confined to athletic
performance, however. Anabo lic steroid users experiencing  increased
aggressiveness may pose a threat both to themselv es and to those
with whom they come in contact (163, 174). Anabol ic steroids are
also associated with mood swings and psychotic episodes. Studies
have shown that nearly 60% of anabol ic steroid users experience
678
increases in irritability and aggressiveness (174). Pope and
colleagues (175) reported significant elevations in aggressiveness
and manic scores following 12 weeks of testoster one cypionate
injections in a controlled double-bl ind crossover study. Interestingly ,
the results of this study were not uniform across the subjects. Most
subjects showed little psychological effect, and few developed
prominent effects. A cause- and-ef fect relationship has yet to be
identi fied in anabol ic steroid users, but it does appear that
individuals who experience psychological or behavioral changes
recover when ster oid use is discontinued (79).
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects associated with anabol ic steroid use are listed in
table 12.2. It is important to note that there are differences between
the side effects of anabol ic steroid use under medical supervision
and those associated with abuse (i.e., consumption of many drugs at
high doses). Most of the information concerning adverse medical
events associa ted with anabol ic steroid use has been acquir ed from
athletes self-administering the drugs. In conjunction, some of the
scienti fic literature has suggested that the medical problems related
to anabol ic steroids may be somewhat overstated (23, 225),
considering that many of the side effects linked to abuse are
reversible on cessation. Anecdotal ly, it appears that a
disproportionate magni tude of use and incidence of adverse events
are evident in bodybui lders (who are also known for consuming
several other drugs—such as diuretics, thyroid hormone s, insulin,
and anti-estr ogens—that relieve some side effects but potentiate
other risk f actors as wel l) compar ed to str ength and power athletes.
Testosterone Precursors (Prohormones)
Prohormones are precursors to the synthesis of other hormones and
are theoriz ed to increase the body’s ability to produce a given
specific hormone. The basis for the use of prohormones as an
ergogenic aid evolved from a study showing a threefold increase in
679
testoster one in healthy women who were given 100 milligrams of
either androstenedione or dehydroepiandr osterone (143). Athletes
who have continued to supplement with these testoster one
precursors (andr ostenedione, androstenediol, and
dehydroepiandr osterone [DHEA]) likely do so on the premise that
they will increase testoster one concentr ations, strength, muscle size,
and willingness to train, as well as providing overall athletic
performance enhancements similar to those experienced by people
taking anabol ic steroids. Howev er, these precursors have only
relatively weak androgenic properties in themselv es;
androstenedione and DHEA have only 1/5th and 1/10th the
biological activity of testoster one, respectiv ely (153). Nevertheless,
testoster one precursors were officially listed as controlled substances
in the 2004 Anabol ic Steroid Contr ol Act passed by the U.S.
Congr ess, which mandated a physician’ s prescription for these
substances.
TABLE 12.2  Signs and Symptoms of Ergogenic Aid
Abuse
Affected system Adverse effects
Cardiovascular Lipid pr ofile changes
Elevated blood pr essure
Decreased m yocardial function
Endocrine Gynecomastia
Decreased sperm count
Testicular atr ophy
Impotence and tr ansient inf ertility
Genitourinary Males
Decreased sperm count
Decreased testicular siz e
Females
Menstrual cy cle irr egulari ties
Clitoromegaly
Deepening of v oice
Mascul inization
680
Affected system Adverse effects
Males and f emales
Gynecomastia
Libido changes
Dermatological Acne
Male pat tern baldness
Hepatic Increased risk of l iver tumors and l iver damage
Musculosk eletal Prematur e epiph yseal plate closur e
Increased risk of tendon tears
Intramuscular abscess
Psychological Mania
Depression
Aggression
Hostility
Mood swings
Designer Anabolic Steroid Control Act of
2014 (DASCA)
In the past few decades, the United States Congr ess enacted laws regulating
anabol ic steroids. The first law was the Anabol ic Steroid Contr ol Act of 1990. This
was updated in 2004. Ten years later, this was updated again as the Designer
Anabol ic Steroid Contr ol Act of 2014 (DASCA). Noteworth y items about DASCA
include the f ollowing:
Congr ess felt that the laws before DASCA failed to sufficiently curtai l the
misuse of anabol ic ster oids.
Through DASCA, Congress targeted those who would circumvent the Anabol ic
Steroid Contr olled Act of 2004 by manuf acturing anabol ic steroids with
slightly different chemical structur es from those expressly controlled but that
are intended to cause the same potential ly harmf ul effects.
DASCA amended the defini tion of “anabol ic steroid” by adding 22 new
substances to the prior l ist.
Studies examining the efficacy of testoster one precursors have
produced varying results. No significant differences in strength or
body composi tion were seen in middle- aged men performing a
681
resistance training program while supplementing with either DHEA,
androstenedione (100 mg), or a placebo for three months (219).
When DHEA supplementation (150 mg) was examined in a group of
younger males (19-29 years) on a two-weeks-on, one-week-off cycle
for eight weeks, there were no gains in strength or lean tissue (33).
Additional ly, the investigators were unable to see any changes in
serum testoster one, estrone, estradiol, or lipid concentr ations with
supplementation. Even in studies using higher dosages (300 mg) of
androstenedione for eight weeks, in a similar two-weeks-on, one-
week-off protocol, no significant effect was observ ed in strength,
muscle size, or testoster one concentr ations (33). Howev er,
androstenedione supplement ation did cause an increase in serum
concentr ations of estradiol and estrone and was associated with
lower high-densi ty lipoprotein (HDL) levels. These results suggest
that although performance changes may not occur in athletes taking
this supplement, they may be at higher risk for some of the negativ e
side effects associated with anabol ic steroid use. Broeder and
colleagues (30), in the conclusion to their Andro Project study in
which they investigated the physiological and hormonal influences of
androstenedione in conjunction with a high-intensi ty resistance
training pr ogram, made the f ollowing statement:
Testoster one precursors do not enhance adaptations to
resistance training when consumed in dosages recomme nded
by manuf acturers. Testoster one precursor supplementation
does result in significant increases in estrogen-r elated
compounds, dehydroepiandr osterone sulfate concentr ations,
down-r egulation in testoster one synthesis, and unfavorable
alterations in blood lipid and coronary heart disease risk
profiles of men aged 35 to 65 y ears. (p . 3093)
Based on the scientific evidence, it appears as if prohormones fall
far short of providing the anabol ic effects gener ally associated with
androgens (32). Howev er, scienti fic resear ch has focused almost
exclusiv ely on only a few prohormone supplements—DHEA,
682
androstenediol, 19-nor -androstenedione, and 19-nor -androstenediol.
There are many other prohormone supplements available that have
not been clinically tested. Also, use of prohormones has not been
studied in highly trained athletes. In addition, oral administr ation has
been the primary method of taking prohormones. The oral use of
prohormones may not be as effective as other means of intake (e.g.,
injection). All of this suggests  that continued study of the efficacy of
the testoster one precursors for performance enhancement is still
needed; specifically warranted is examination of other routes of
ingestion in a tr ained competi tive athletic population.
Selective And rogen R eceptor Modulators
and Peptides
Selective androgen recep tor modulators (SARMs)  are tissue-
selectiv e agonists of androgen receptors in tissues such as muscle
and bone. As a result, SARMs are purported to have similar anabol ic
properties as traditional anabol ic steroids but with reduced
androgenic effects in other tissues where these effects are undesir ed
(e.g., liver or prostate). Therefore, there is also hope that SARMs
may produce more limited side effects when compar ed to anabol ic
steroids. The development of novel peptides , or short chains of
amino acids that regulate cellular functions and biochemical
processes, has been an emerging frontier in pharmaceutical
development alongside SARMs and, similar to SARMs, has potential
for selectiv e agonism and thus limited side effects. Due to their
significant clinical potential in diseases or disorders characteriz ed by
muscle wasting, SARMs and various peptides have been and
continue to be tested in preclinical studies and in clinical trials in
various patient populations. Howev er, there are no current FDA-
approved SARMs, and all are currently investigational drugs. All
SARMs are also currently prohibited both in and outside of
competi tion (i.e., at all times) for all athletes by WADA. Similarly,
hormone (e.g., testoster one, growth hormone, corticotrophin)-
stimulating peptides are prohibited at all times by WADA. Despi te
683
this, SARMs and peptides are widely marketed to and used
recreational ly by athletes and have also been found undisclosed in
dietary supplem ents (220). Table 12.3 lists SARMs that are popular
among recreational users. Athletes should be aware, howev er, that
products marketed and sold as SARMs or peptides may be just as
likely to contain a different drug or no SARMs or peptides at all.
Indeed, a chemical analysis of 44 products sold on the Internet as
SARMs indicate d that only 52% of these actual ly contained a SARM,
59% contained substance amounts that were different from that
listed on the label, and 39% contained a different unappr oved drug
altogether (212).
TABLE 12.3  Example Selective Androgen Receptor
Modulators (SARMs) Popular Among Recreational
Users
Research or developmental name Trade name
MK 2866/GTx -024 Enobosarm
Ostarine
GTx-007 Andarine
LGD-4033 Ligandr ol
RAD140 Testolone
S-23 —
YK-11 Myanabol
GSK2881078 —
Safety and Efficacy
Similar to anabol ic steroids, the purported ergogeni c benefi ts
attributed to SARMs include increased muscle mass, strength, and
performance. As alluded to previously , SARMs have primari ly been
tested in the context of clinical trials in patient population s in whom
muscle wasting  or muscle weakness are a major concern. Howev er,
there is some limited available evidence regarding the safety and
684
efficacy of SARMs in healthy individuals in phase 1 trials. For
example, three weeks of LGD-4033 (e.g., ligandr ol) use has been
shown to promote dose-dependent increases in lean body mass
among healthy young and middle- aged men (15). As is often
observ ed with oral androgen administr ation, these improvements in
lean body mass were observ ed alongside a dose-dependent
suppr ession of total testoster one, sex hormone–binding globul in
(SHBG), high-densi ty lipoprotein cholester ol (HDL-C), and
triglycerides (15). Similarly, other SARMs such as GSK2881078 and
GTx-024 (enobosarm) have been shown to cause dose-dependent
increases in lean mass and decreases in HDL-C, SHBG, and total
testoster one, suggestiv e of significant androgen receptor agonism
(43, 157), as well as decreased triglycerides, very-low-densi ty
lipoprotein, and apolipoprotein A1 (43). Most of these trials also
indicate that short-term SARM administr ation is well tolerated with
mild and infrequent adverse events relative to placebo but with
consistent decreases in HDL-C and increased alanine transaminase.
Thus, concern still exists related to hepato xicity with SARM use, and
there have been reports of adverse SARM-induced cardiovascular
and hepatic outcomes with certain SARMs (101). For example, case
reports have associated acute myocarditis and liver injury with
RAD140 use by recreational athletes, which appar ently resolved with
cessation of use (136, 162). Accordingly , the FDA issued a warning
to consumers that SARMs have been associated with serious or life-
threatening health problems that include increased risk of heart
attack or stroke, liver injury , sleep disturbances, sexual dysfunction,
and miscarriage.
Several of the peptides that have garner ed interest in
bodybui lding communi ties, such as the growth hormone (GH)
secretagogue MK-677, showed preliminary efficacy for increasing
bone turnover and fat-free mass in older adults (156), but clinical
trials were terminated early due to significant safety signals such as
increased incidence of congestive heart failure (2). A case report
indicated that a five-week cycle of coadminister ed LGD-4033 and
685
MK-677 was associated with adverse effects on cholester ol,
testoster one, liver function markers, and bone miner al density in a
25-year-old resistance-tr ained male (37). Somapaci tan, an FDA-
approved peptide for use in adults with GH deficiency , reduces trunk
fat and increases lean body mass in adults with GH deficie ncy (124).
Howev er, it is notable that chronic (~20 weeks) administr ation of
peptides such as hexar elin have no effects on body composi tion
despite causing profound increases in GH release in healthy adults
(178). Other peptides, such as the GLP-1 receptor agonists
liraglutide and semaglutide, have demonstr ated strong efficacy for
weight loss in individuals with overweight or obesity (169, 223), and
despite a lack of evidence for efficacy among individua ls without
excess body fat, these weight loss effects may be intriguing to
recreational users for cosmetic reasons. Table 12.4 lists some
example peptid e hormone classes that are explicitly named on the
WADA banned l ist.
Despi te the promise of short-term safety and efficacy displa yed by
several SARMs in initial clinical trials among healthy individuals,
substantial work is still necessary to understand the short- and long-
term risks associated with SARM and peptide use, understanding
that each SARM and peptide is structur ally different and is therefore
likely to produce different primary and secondary (or side) effects.
Moreover, and as noted earlier, in many cases, SARMs available on
the market may include other potential ly unsaf e, nondisclosed
substances or may not contain the disclosed SARM at all (212);
therefore, risks of SARM or peptide use may be amplified among
recreational users. Figure 12.3 lists the short-term changes in lean
mass whi le consuming sev eral different types of S ARMs.
TABLE 12.4  Example Peptide Hormone Classes and
Specific Peptides Used by Recreational Users
Explicitly Named on the WADA Banned List
686
Testosterone stimulating
peptidesChorionic gonadotr opin, luteinizing hormone (LH),
gonadotr opin r eleasing hormone (GnRH, gonador elin)
and its agonist analogues (buser elin, deslor elin,
goser elin, leupr orelin, naf arelin, and triptor elin),
kisspeptin and i ts agonist analogues
Corticotrophin and
corticotrophin releasing
factorsCoricor elin and tetr acosactide
Growth hormone (GH) and
its analoguesLonapegsomatr opin, somapaci tan, somatr ogon, AOD-
9604, and hGH 176-191
Growth hormone
secretagogues/releasing
peptidesGHRH, sermor elin, CJC -1293/1295, tesamor elin, MK -677,
lenomor elin (ghr elin), anamor elin, macimor elin,
tabimor elin, capr omorelin, alexamor elin, examor elin
(hexar elin), GHRP-1–6
Growth factors and growth
factor modulatorsIGF-1, mecasermin, FGFs, HGF , MGFs, PDGF , TB-500,
VEG-Fs, and an y other gr owth f actors or gr owth f actor
modulators
Erythropoietins (EPO) and
agents affecting
erythropoiesisErythr opoietin r eceptor agonists (dEPO), EPO , EPO-
based constructs (EPO-Fc, CERA), EPO-mimetic agents
and their constructs (CNT O-530, peginesatide); h ypoxia
inducible f actor (HIF) activ ating agents (cobal t,
daprodustat, IO X2, mol idustat, r oxadustate, v adadustat,
and x enon); GA TA inhibi tors; tr ansforming gr owth f actor
beta ( TGF-β) signal ing inhibi tors (luspater cept,
sotater cept); innate r epair r eceptor agonists (asialo EPO ,
CEPO)
Data from World Anti-Doping Agency , “World Anti-Doping Code International Standar d
Prohibited List 2025, ” last modified September 12, 2024, https:// www.wada-ama.org/sites
/default/files/2024 -09/2025l ist_en_final _clean _12_september _2024 .pdf.
687
FIGURE 12.3 Changes in total body lean mass in response to short-term LGD-4033
administr ation in healthy young men (squar es), GSK2881078 administr ation in older men
and postmenopausal women (gender  symbols), and GTx-024 in older men and women
(triangles). Changes in lean body mass gener ally demonstr ated dose dependency , with
greater changes observ ed in r esponse to higher doses.
Data from Basaria et al. (2013), Neil et al. (2018); Dalton et al. (2011).
Adverse Effects
No known reports or scienti fic studies have investigated the adverse
effects of selectiv e andr ogen r eceptor modulators and peptides.
HCG (Human Chorionic Gonadotropin)
Human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG)  is a hormone obtained
from the placenta of pregnan t women and is very closely related in
structur e and function to luteinizing hormone. In fact, it is the
pregnancy indicator used by over-the-counter pregnancy test kits,
since it is generally not found in the body at any other time. In the
gener al popul ation, HCG is sometimes injected into overweight
females under medical supervision in conjunction with low-calorie
diets for the purposes of weight loss (87). Resear ch suggests that
when used for this purpose, HCG is not effective for inducing weight
loss. The caloric restriction that accompanies the HCG injections
appears to be the main contributing factor to associated weight loss
(87).
688
Efficacy
While HCG offers females no performance-enhancing ability, it is
cited anecdotal ly as useful for males who take anabol ic steroids.
When injected into men, HCG can increase testicular testoster one
production; testoster one levels can nearly double within four days
after a large intramuscular injection (48). The activity of HCG in the
male body is due to its ability to mimic luteinizing hormone, a
pituitary hormone that stimu lates the Leydig cells in the testicles to
manuf acture testoster one. The reason males would want to be
injected with HCG to increase endogenous testoster one levels is that
endogenous testoster one production is suppr essed at the end of a
steroid cycle (151, 154). For that reason, if HCG is used by athletes,
it is likely used by those who are finishing a cycle of anabol ic
steroids and are looking to activate their own endogenous
testoster one pr oduction.
Adverse Effects
Human chorionic gonadotr opin is given as an injection under the
skin or into a muscle; the side effects that are common to such
administr ation are pain, swelling, and tenderness around the
injection site. There is very little resear ch on the side effects of HCG
injections. In one investigatio n in which HCG was injected into obese
women, no adverse effects were reported in relation to blood
pressure or r outine blood work (197).
Insulin
Insulin  is a potent anabolic hormone . It is secreted by the pancr eas
in response to elevations in blood glucose or specific amino acid
(e.g., leucine) concentr ations . Its role is to facilitate the uptak e of
glucose and amino acids into the cell. Since insulin increases protein
synthesis, i t is consider ed an anabol ic hormone.
689
Efficacy
When insulin concentr ations are elevated naturally (i.e.,
endogenously from the pancreas following carboh ydrate ingestion),
there are no safety concerns in otherwise healthy individuals.
Additional ly, it has been reported that postwork out carbohydrate
ingestion suppresses muscle protein breakdown via the anticatabol ic
effects of insulin (29). Theor etically, if protein breakdown is
suppr essed over several weeks to months, gains in lean muscle
mass could be r ealized.
Adverse Effects
Because of insulin’s anabol ic properties and its rumor ed ability to
potentiate the effects of growth hormone and insulin-like growth
factors, some individuals (primari ly bodybui lders) take insulin by
injection. The use of insulin in this manner comes with serious
consequences. Possible outcomes in a previously healthy athlete
include immediate death or coma due to sev ere hypogly cemia (106).
Human Growth Hormone
Human growth hormone (HGH) , a protein secreted from the
anterior pituitary gland, has several important physiological functions
that enhance its ergogenic effect. It is anabol ic due to its stimulation
of bone and skeletal muscle growth, but it also has important
metabol ic functions such as maintaining blood glucose levels,
increasing the uptak e of glucose and amino acids into muscle cells
(67), and stimulating r elease of f atty acids f rom the f at cel ls.
The primary source of pharmacologic growth hormone is a
relatively compl icated molecule from which it is synthetical ly derived
using recombinant DNA technology . Howev er, until 1986, the only
source of the hormone was the pituitaries of human cadavers.
Because HGH receptors are unable to cross-react with growth
hormone from animal sources, the financial cost of HGH was very
high before 1986. Although  the use of cadaver growth hormone
came with significant health risks, these consequences did not
690
prevent athletes from taking the supplement but instead only
substantial ly restricted use (115). The development of recombinant
HGH provided clinicians with a relatively low-risk drug at a lower cost
(as compar ed to cadaver growth hormone) with greater availability.
Clinicians can now prescribe recombinant HGH to increase statur e in
short children with growth hormone deficiency and alter body
composi tion in adults. The use of HGH as a performance -enhancing
substance is believed to be widespr ead among professional athletes;
it is either taken alone or stacked with anabol ic steroids (16). Even
though recombinant technology has increased the availability of
HGH, its cost, especial ly on the black market, is extremely high—
between several hundr ed and a few thousand dollars per month.
Humatr ope, Nutropin, Norditropin, Genotr opin, Omnitrope, Serostim,
Saizen, and Protropin are brand names of HGH commonly used in
the Uni ted States.
Efficacy
There appear to be no studie s on the efficacy of HGH in professional
athletes. Most investigations of HGH have focused on HGH as
replacement therapy in growth hormone–deficient adults and
children or in healthy older individuals. These studies have
consistently shown positive alterations in body composi tion
(increases in lean body tissue  with decreases in body fat) (66, 204).
In men with establ ished growth hormone deficiencie s, nightly
injections of recombinant HGH for six months resulted in an average
increase of 12 pounds (5.4 kg) in lean body mass and a similar
amount of fat loss (184). Most studies have not addressed the effect
of HGH therapy on muscle strength and performance. One study
showed no changes in isokinetic strength following 12 months of
therapy (112). Howev er, the subjects in that study did not perform
any resistance training during the course of treatmen t. A study
involving trained adults given growth hormone (three days per week
for six weeks) showed mode st changes in body composi tion, but no
strength assessment was performed (50). Although the scienti fic
691
literature does not provide support for the efficacy of HGH use in
athletic populations, it is likely that the inability to perform such
studies (due to ethical constr aints) will limit much of our
understanding of HGH and human performance. In years past, the
use of HGH by athletes may have been prevalent in some
professional sports because of its perceived efficacy and the fact that
it could not be detected in random drug tests . Currently, HGH
cannot be detected in the urine via a drug test, and it may be
postulated that athletes opt to use it for this reason. Howev er, a
blood test for HGH was first introduced at the 2004 Summer Olympic
Games in A thens, Gr eece.
Growth hormo ne is a protein molecule. Injection is necessary in
order to avoid its complete metabol ism and maintain its
effectiveness. Oral ingestion does not result in any benef it. Many of
the actions of growth hormone are mediated through insulin-like
growth factor-1 (IGF-1), another peptide hormone, which is
produced and secreted from the liver in response to growth hormone
stimulation. IGF-1 is now being synthesiz ed using recombinant DNA
technology and wi ll likely pr oduce the same ef fects as HGH.
Adverse Effects
The use of HGH does, howev er, present some potential  significant
health risks. Excessiv e secretion of growth hormone during
childhood causes gigantism, a condi tion in which a person becomes
abnormal ly tall. After pubert y, once linear growth has stopped,
excess secretion of growth hormone causes acromegaly , a
disfiguring disease characteriz ed by a widening of the bones,
arthri tis, organ enlargement, and metabol ic abnormal ities. This is a
potential risk for athletes who use HGH as an ergogenic aid.
Additional ly, these side effects may provide some indication that the
athlete could be using this drug. In clinical studies in growth
hormone–deficient adults, side effects appear to be minim al for even
up to two years of replacement therapy (1, 209). Howev er, athletes
who supplement with HGH gener ally use dosages that far exceed the
692
doses commonly administer ed in replacement treatment (16). Thus,
one should not assume that HGH use is benign with regard to
adverse medic al events in doses commonly used by an athletic
population. Adverse side effects for HGH abuse are diabetes in prone
individuals; cardiovascular dysfunction; muscle, joint, and bone pain;
hypertension; abnormal growth of organs; and accelerated
osteoarthri tis (16).
Although growth hormon e used as replacement therapy
for people with growth hormone or IGF-1 deficiency can
be effectiv e and can have minimal adverse
consequences, the dosages that are likely used by
athletes may pose a significant risk for acromegaly.
Erythropoietin
One of the limiting factors for endur ance performance is the athlete’ s
ability to deliver oxygen to the contracting skeletal muscle . Over the
years, several methods have been developed to increase the body’s
ability to deliver oxygen. Some methods include novel training
programs that may naturally elevate red blood cell and hemoglobin
levels (i.e., living and training at altitude), while other methods
involve synthetic means to elevate the oxygen-carrying capaci ty of
the blood (i.e., blood doping). Blood doping increases  one’s red
blood cell mass and is typically conducted using blood transfusions
or taking a hormone known as erythr opoietin . There are two forms
of blood doping via blood transfusions: autologous and homologous.
Autologous blood doping is the transfusion of one’s own blood,
which has been stored (refrigerated or frozen) until needed.
Homologous blood doping is the transfusion of blood that has been
taken from another person with the same blood type. Since the late
1980s, blood doping via autologous blood transfusion has taken a
back seat to the more popular method, administr ation of
recombinant human erythr opoietin (39).
693
Erythropoietin (EPO)  is produced in the kidneys and stimulates
the production of new red blood cells. It is also a protein hormone
that can be produced by recombinant DNA techniqu es and is
reportedly being abused by athletes (64). Erythr opoietin use was
one of the methods of doping that Lance Armstr ong admitted to
over the course of his cycling career. The EPO level in the blood
increases in response to chronic aerobic endur ance exercise. In
certain types of anemia, especial ly in kidney patients with
inadequate EPO production, recombinant human EPO can improve
the qual ity of life of the individual.
Efficacy
Injections of EPO are gener ally associated with elevations in both
hematocri t and hemoglobin. A 2013 systematic review and meta-
analysis indicated that EPO administr ation promotes increases in
hemoglobin and hematocri t of 5% to 17% and 8% to 19%,
respectiv ely (108). These increases are accompanied by increases in
aerobic capaci ty and maxima l power output of 7% to 10%, which
are in turn linked with improvements in time to exhausti on in open
endpoint exercise for both trained (9%-17%) and untrained
(22%-50%) individuals (108). Therefore, the ability of EPO to
enhance oxygen-carrying capaci ty of the blood suggests it is likely to
be an effective ergogenic aid for the aerobic endur ance athlete.
Initial evidence also indicates  that 16 days of EPO administr ation can
elicit changes in the skeletal muscle proteome in a manner that
supports aerobic exercise performance (e.g., increased oxidativ e
enzyme activity) (42). Howev er, it is also important to note that the
effect of EPO administr ation on time trial performance or other
parameters critical toward aerobic exercise performance such as the
ventilatory threshold, critical velocity, or critical power is not well
understood. While much of the resear ch conducted with EPO is
focused on endur ance performance, there is theoretical rationale for
EPO use by anaer obic athletes to improve recovery from high-
intensi ty efforts.
694
Adverse Effects
While medical ly supervised use of EPO provides therapeutic benefi t
in the treatmen t of anemia related to kidney disease, its misuse can
lead to serious health risks for athletes who use this substance
simply to gain a competi tive edge. The increase in hematocri t
resulting from EPO injection presents a significant health risk.
Increases in red blood cell number increase blood viscosi ty (the
thickening of the blood). This poses several problems that include
increased risk of blood clotting, elevations in systol ic blood pressure
and accentuation of the exercise pressor response stroke, and
cerebral or pulmonary embol ism (22, 42, 82). During aerobic
endur ance events, the additional problem of dehydration could
compound cardiovascular risks by eliminating any safety margin in
the balance between performance advantages from artificially
increased hematocri t and decrements from increased blood viscosi ty.
Several studies have noted marked accentuation of the blood
pressure response during exercise following EPO administ ration. The
deaths of a number of compe titive cyclists have been related to EPO
administr ation (82). The primary risk associated with EPO is its lack
of predictability compar ed to red blood cell infusion. Once EPO is
injected into the body, the stimulus for producing red blood cells is
no longer under control. Consequently , aerobic endur ance athletes
should avoid this drug because of the significant cardiovascular risk,
leading to possible death, associated wi th its administr ation.
β-Adrenerg ic Agonists
Synthetic β-adrenergic agonists, or β-agonists , are substances
chemical ly related to epinephrine, a hormone produced in the
adrenal medul la that regulates physiological effects, such as
lipolysis  (the breakdown of fat) and thermogenesis  (increased
energy expendi ture resulting in the production of heat). β-Agonists
were original ly developed for the treatment of asthma and other life-
threatening medical condi tions. Some of these compounds have
been found to have specific effects on body composi tion, such as
695
increases in lean mass and decreases in stored fat (177); because of
this, these drugs are sometimes referred to as partitioning agents .
One of the more popular β-agonists used by athletes is the drug
clenbuter ol (177).
Efficacy
Clenbuter ol is a β2-agonist and is a widely used bronchodi lator (used
to reverse bronchial restriction) in many parts of the world. Athletes
use clenbuter ol as an ergogenic aid to increase lean muscle tissue
and reduce subcutaneous fat (177). Data on the effectiveness of
clenbuter ol have typical ly been based not on healthy athletes, but
rather subjects with heart failure (125) and patients experiencing
muscle- wasting condi tions (144). Though studies in humans are
limited, several findings have indicated an ergogenic potential of β2-
agonists for strength improvements (145). Athletes generally use
clenbuter ol in doses twice the recommended amounts administer ed
for clinical purposes, in a cyclic fashion (three weeks on alternated
with three weeks off, with a two-da ys-on, two-da ys-off cycle during
the “on” week) (177).
Adverse Effects
Athletes consume clenbuter ol in a capsule form, in contrast to the
inhalation route that is often used for relieving bronchial constriction.
Although a number of potential side effects have been suggested
(i.e., transien t tachycardia, hyperthermia, tremors, dizziness,
palpitations, and insomnia),  actual documented events are quite
limited (196). In addition, the scarcity of data on the ergogenic
potential of clenbuter ol in humans makes determining its efficacy
difficult.
β-Blockers
β-Blockers  are a class of drugs that block the β-adrenergic
receptors, preventing the catecholamines (i.e., norepinephrine and
epinephrine) from binding. β-Blockers are gener ally prescribed by
696
cardiologists for the treatment of a wide variety of cardiovascular
diseases, including hyperten sion. The ergogenic benefi t of these
drugs may reside in their ability to reduce anxiet y and tremors
during performance (138). Thus, athletes who rely on steady ,
controlled movements during performance (i.e., archers or
marksmen) would appear to benefi t from these drugs. Also, β-
blockers may improve physiological adaptations from aerobic
endur ance training by causing an upregulation of β-receptors. If this
is true, it would result in an exagger ated response to sympathetic
dischar ge during intense ex ercise on cessation of supplementation.
Efficacy
Several studies  have shown that β-block ers can improve both slow
and fast shooting accuracy (7, 135). In addition, the dose taken
appears to have significant effects on the magni tude of
improvement. In shooters who administer ed β-block ers in two
different doses  (80 mg vs. 40 mg of oxprenolol), the group taking
the higher dose shot with greater accuracy (7). In certain sports,
howev er, some degree of anxiet y may be important. Tesch (205)
reported that bowlers whose performance was improved during
blockade with oxprenolol had significantly greater heart rates before,
during, and after competi tion than subjects whose performance did
not impr ove whi le on β-block ers.
Impact of Alcohol on Performance
Both acute and chronic alcohol consum ption can impede exercise performance by
adversely affecting  several physiological processes critical toward optim izing
performance and recovery. Perhaps most obviously , acute alcohol consumption can
impair performance in skilled tasks by effects on fine motor control, reaction time,
judgment, and arousal (191). Howev er, acute alcohol consumption has also been
shown to impede skeletal muscle metabol ism, recovery, and adaptation. For
example, isometric and dynamic strength loss induced by strenuous eccentric
exercise is exacerbated by high-dose postex ercise alcohol consumption (~6.3
standar d drinks over 1.5 hours, where a standar d drink contains 14 g of pure
alcohol) in young men (14), although strength trained women may be protected
from this effect (137). Similarly, mechanistic studies suggest that acute high-dose
697
(~4–8.5 standar d drinks) alcohol ingestion after strenuous resistance or high-
intensi ty interv al training impedes exercise-induced phosphorylation of the
mammal ian target of rapam ycin comp lex 1 (mTORC1) pathway and reduces  rates
of muscle  protein synthesis, an effect that also appears to be most prominent in
men (60, 165). Alcohol also has known diuretic effects, causing an increase in
excess urine production of about 10 milliliters for every gram of ethanol ingested
(63). Therefore, hydration-r elated effects are most significant when concentr ated
alcohol solutions are consumed, and consumption of dilute alcohol solutions or
alcohol with adequa te additional fluid intake can offset the diuretic effect (191). In
addition, large alcohol doses can dramatical ly affect thermor egulatory ability,
augmenting en vironmental heat loss at low ambient temper atures (88, 89).
Finally, alcohol can impair exercise performance and recovery via effects on
sleep and autonomic function. For example, evening binge alcohol consumption (4-
5 standard drinks within 2 hours) disrupts sleeping cardiac vagal tone and reduces
sleep quality (53, 93), and increases sympathoex citation and disrupts blood
pressure regulation the following morning (94). These disruptions may serve to
increase cardiovascular strain and impair performance during subsequent exercise,
although this has not been directly tested. It is important to note that many of
these effects are likely dependent on the amount of alcohol consumed, and studies
to tease out dose-d ependent effects (particularly at high doses) are difficult both
logistical ly and ethical ly.
Evidence also shows that chronic alcohol consumption can impair muscle
metabol ism and impede training-induced adaptations. Skeletal muscle from middle-
aged men and women with chronic alcohol abuse displa ys increased catabol ic
markers (e.g., MurF-1, ubiquinated proteins), decreased anabol ic markers (e.g.,
phosphorylated 4E-BP1), and decreased insulin receptor substr ate 1, which plays a
critical role in transmi tting signals from insulin and IGF-1 to coordinate cellular
growth and metabo lism (189, 190). Therefore, chronic alcohol consumptio n can
impede training-r elated adaptations and promote signatur es consistent  with
myopath y in muscle, but the degree to which these effects occur are likely directly
related to the degr ee of alcohol use (or abuse).
Adverse Effects
β-Blockers may also have an ergolytic  effect (reduce performance).
Studies have shown that β-block ers impair the cardiovascular
response to exercise by reducing maximal heart rate, oxygen
consumption, and 10-kilometer (6.2 miles) race time performance
(6). Also, β-block ers are associated with an increased rating of
perceived exertion (205). Risks associated with these drugs include
bronchospasm, heart failure, prolonged hypogly cemia, bradycardia,
heart block, and intermi ttent claudication (78).
698
Dietary Supplements
The global market for sports nutrition products continues to grow at
a significant pace, with an estimated market value of over US$53.6
billion (208). Some sports nutrition companies make unsubstantiated
claims concerning the efficacy of their products. At times,
unscrupulous companies have knowingly placed analogs of banned
substances in their products to enhance their effects (44). As a
result, much confusion has been created among athletes regarding
appropriate supplements and the ethics of companies. This section
describes dietary supplements that are commonly used by athletes
and pr esents scienti fic examination of their ef ficacy .
Essential Amino Acids, Branched-Chain
Amino Acids
Essential amino acids (EAAs) are not produced in the body and
must be obtained through the diet. They include histidine,
isoleucine, leucine, valine, lysine, methionine, phenylalanine,
threonine, and tryptophan. High levels of EAAs can be found in any
number of animal-based proteins or as supplements sold over the
counter . Leucine can also be found in plants such as spinach and
broccoli, but the amount of leucine is minimal when compar ed to
that in animal-based sour ces.
Efficacy
Scientists have been able to delineate certain categories of amino
acids as well as individual amino acids and their role in stimulating
muscle protein synthesis. For example, Tipton and colleagues (206)
reported that nonessential amino acids were not necessary to
stimulate muscle protein synthesis; rather, only the presence of EAAs
is needed. In this resear ch (206), six healthy adults, three males and
three females, participated in resistance exercise (8 sets of 8
repetitions at 80% 1RM) and then consumed either 40 grams of
mixed amino acids (composed of both nonessential and essential
699
amino acids), 40 grams of EAA, or a placebo . While the mixed amino
acids and the EAA induced an anabol ic response that was
significantly greater than with the placebo treatment, no difference
was observed between the amino acid treatments. Since there was
no difference, it was conclu ded that nonessential amino acids are
not needed to stimulate muscle protein synthesis. In a follow-up
study, using the same protocol (but with only 6 g EAA and 35 g
sugar), Rasmu ssen and colleagues (180) demonstr ated significantly
greater anabol ic drive—that is, the building of new muscle tissue—
with the EAA supplement (when given shortly after resistance
exercise) v ersus the placebo .
Subsequently , Tipton and colleagues (207) examined the effects
of consuming 6 grams EAA plus 36 grams of sugar, before or after
resistance training, on muscle protein metabol ism. They reported
that when the EAA plus sugar was consumed 30 minutes before
resistance training, the acute (3 hr after exercise) anabol ic response
was 158% greater than when the EAA and sugar supple ment were
consumed after training. As a result of these acute findings, Tipton
and colleagues (207) and Rasmussen and colleagues (180) theoriz ed
that a person who consume d EAA before or after (or both before
and after) every resistance training session over a period of weeks
would experience greater changes in muscle mass than with training
only. It is important to note that although the nonessential amino
acids are not required to stimulate muscle protein synthesis, this
does not mean that they are not important for maximizing training
adaptations in the athlete. The condi tional ly essential and
nonessential amino acids serve as the substr ates that are
incorpor ated into the newly formed muscle proteins; further , they
also spare the conversion of these amino acids from the essential
ones, thus ef fectively incr easing the lev els of EAAs.
Prior work in animal models further identi fied that of the eight
EAAs, it is the branched-chain amino acids (BCAAs) —isoleucine,
leucine, and valine—that are responsible for increasing muscle
protein synthe sis (83). Of the BCAAs, it appears that leucine is the
700
key amino acid for stimulating muscle protein synthesis (126) via the
Akt/mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway (figure 12.4).
Norton and cowork ers (159) demonstr ated in rodent models that a
leucine threshold for stimulating muscle protein synthesis exists.
Based on this pioneering resear ch, many nutrition resear chers now
believe that the leucine content in any given protein intake is the
rate-limiting factor in terms of maximizing muscle protein synthesis
within the capaci ty of skeletal muscle rather than simply the total
amount of protein ingested. To support this theory of the importance
of the content of a protein meal, Pasiakos and colleagues (166)
reported that a leucine-enriched EAA beverage resulted in a
significant elevation of muscle protein synthesis compar ed to a
normal leucine-containing EAA beverage. In this study, trained males
ingested one of two different 10-gr am EAA beverages during cycling
exercise—one containing 3.5 grams of leucine (46 mg/kg body
mass) and the other containing 1.87 grams of leucine (~25 mg/kg
body mass). After the exercise bout (during a 3-hr assessment
period), muscl e protein synthesis was 33% greater in the leucine-
enriched EAA beverage. The importance of leucine intake and its role
in the anabol ic response of skeletal muscle following resistance
training continues to be a popular topic in sports nutrition resear ch
today.
FIGURE 12.4  Role of leucine in muscle pr otein synthesis.
701
The branche d-chain amino acid leucine is a key
regulator in stimulating muscle protein synthesis.
Leucine directly activate s the Akt/mTOR pathw ay in
skeletal muscle, which is a key pathway in skeletal
muscle protein synthesis.
Adverse Effects
No known reports or scienti fic studies have investigated the adverse
effects of br anched-chain amino acid or EAA supplementation.
Arginine
Arginine is a condi tional ly essential amino acid and has crucial roles
in nutrition and metabol ism. Arginine is required for the synthesis of
protein and creatine, and its metabol ism results in the production of
nitric oxide. The claims often attributed to arginine supplementation
are its ability to elevate nitric oxide levels, increase muscle blood
flow, and improve exercise performance. Each of these claims is
directed at athletes or physical ly active individuals, because these
are all outcomes that would be beneficial for enhancing sport
performance or maximizing training adaptations. Unfortunately ,
there is very little scienti fic evidence supporting these claims
regarding arginine supplementation in the populations that these
outcomes would benefi t.
Efficacy
Oral arginine supplementation is most often marketed for its
potential to elevate nitric oxide levels. Nitric oxide possesses many
physiological roles in the human body, but its effects on
vasodilation  (i.e., the widening of blood vessels) are what make it
important during exercising condi tions. During exercise, nitric oxide
levels are naturally increased  so that more blood can flow through
the arteries and arterioles for the purpose of delivering oxygen and
fuel substr ates to the working skeletal muscles (27). While nitric
oxide is essential for vasodilation, the overwhelming majori ty of the
702
scienti fic literature does not support the claim that oral arginine
supplementation increases nitric oxide production to levels that are
greater than the effects of exercise alone in healthy individuals (5,
142).
A natural outcome of nitric oxide production is increased muscle
blood flow. Therefore, increasing muscle blood flow is also a popular
claim that is made regarding arginine’ s effectiveness. Despi te the
common perception among athletes and consumers of dietary
supplements that arginine supplementation does increase muscle
blood flow, investigations into this area are in agreement that
muscle blood flow is not increased in healthy individuals following
arginine supple mentation (203). Oral arginine supplemen tation has
also been purported to improve endur ance exercise performance.
Howev er, in resear ch investigating arginine’ s effectiveness in healthy
populations, it was reported that time to exhaustion, local muscular
endur ance, and intermi ttent anaer obic exercise performance were
not improved as a result of supplementation (95, 142, 214). Due to
its inability to increase nitric oxide production, enhance muscle blood
flow, or improve several modes of endur ance exercise, oral arginine
supplementation is not r ecommended f or heal thy athletes.
Adverse Effects
A major ity of the scienti fic investigations in which arginine was given
to participants to improve exercise performance used a 6-gram dose.
While this dose of arginine was not effective in improving endur ance
performance, this amount was well tolerated and posed no adverse
side effects. Oral suppleme ntation at doses up to 13 grams is
gener ally well tolerated. The most common adverse reactions to
higher doses (13-30 g) include gastrointestinal distress consistent
with nausea, abdominal cr amps, and diarrhea (45).
Due to its inability to increase nitric oxide production,
enhance muscle blood flow, or improve endu rance
703
exercise performance, oral arginine supplementation is
not recommended for healthy athletes.
β-Hydroxy-β-Methylbutyrate
β-Hydroxy- β-methylbutyrate (HMB)  is a derivative of the EAA
leucine and its metabol ite α-ketoisocapr oic acid. Evidence shows that
HMB plays a role in the regulation of muscle protein breakdown in
the body (decreases protein breakdown) by inhibi ting the ubiqui tin–
proteasome pathway (193). Due to HMB’s role in the regulation of
protein breakdown, it may be an effective supplement for minimizing
losses of lean muscle mass in situations that promote a catabol ic
state. β-Hydroxy-β-meth ylbutyrate is not currently banned or
restricted b y sport or ganizations.
Efficacy
The initial resear ch study that highlighted HMB’s anticatabol ic
potential was conducted by Nissen and colleagues (158). In this
study, untrained subjects ingested one of three levels of HMB (0,
1.5, or 3.0 g per day) and two protein levels (117 or 175 g per day)
and resistance trained three days per week for three weeks. As a
measur e of myofibrillar protein breakdown, urinary 3-meth yl-
histidine levels were measur ed (higher levels of urinary 3-meth yl-
histidine mean  that more muscle protein is catabol ized, or broken
down). After the first week of the resistance training protocol,
urinary 3-meth yl-histidine was increased by 94% in the control
group and by 85% and 50% in those individuals ingesting 1.5 and 3
grams of HMB per day, respectiv ely. During the second week of the
study, urinary 3-meth yl-histidine levels were still elevated by 27% in
the control group but were 4% and 15% below basal levels for the
1.5 and 3 grams of HMB per day groups. At the end of the third
week of resistance training, urinary 3-meth yl-histidine levels were
not signi ficantly di fferent between the gr oups (158).
Resear ch in other catabol ic-inducing environments has also
demonstr ated the effectiveness of HMB supplementation. For
704
example, when  older adults were confined to complete bed rest (a
catabol ic state) for 10 days, it was reported that the subjects who
were supplemented with 3 grams of HMB per day lost significantly
less lean body mass (lost only 0.37 lb [0.17 kg]) as compar ed to
those subjects  who were supplemented with a placebo (lost 4.5 lb
[2.04 kg]) (55). Other resear ch findings are in agreement with these
observ ations and have shown that HMB exerts an anticatabol ic effect
and suppr esses muscle damage (130).
In previously untrained individuals initiating a resistance training
program lasting four to eight weeks, HMB has been shown to exert
significantly greater improvements in strength and lean body mass
as compar ed to a placebo (158, 164). The muscle damage and
soreness that result from resistance training are predictably greater
in those who have little training experience as compar ed to
individuals who have engaged in resistance training for longer
periods of time. Given HMB’s ability to suppr ess muscle damage and
muscle protein breakdown, it is not surprising that HMB is effective
for people beginning a new tr aining pr ogram.
The ergogenic  effects of HMB in trained individuals are less
conclusiv e. Studies using resistance-tr ained or competi tive athletes
were unable to duplicate the results seen in a recreational ly trained
population using similar supplementation schedules (160, 179).
Howev er, many of the studies investigating the effects of HMB on
strength and lean body mass in trained individuals were of short
duration (less than five weeks) and lacked the presence of a
periodiz ed, high-intensi ty training program. In order for HMB to be
effective, it may be essential to provide novel stimul i to individuals to
induce either muscle damage or stimulate elevated protein
breakdown. It appears that trained individuals instructed not to
change their programs do not benefi t from HMB. Investigations that
have provided an adequate training stimulus in trained individuals
have also reported increases in maximal strength and lean body
mass as compar ed to placebo tr eatments (158, 164).
705
Adverse Effects
The duration, dosage, and timing of HMB supplementation have
notably varied in the scienti fic literature. In nearly every published
investigation related to HMB supplementation, 3 to 6 grams per day
was ingested. Three grams per day (often divided into several
doses) is the most common dosage used in published studies. The
majori ty of studies investigat ing HMB have used the calcium salt of
HMB—HMB -Ca. Another form of HMB, HMB-free acid, has been
investigated as well (192). The safety of HMB supplementation has
been widely studied, and currently, the consensus is that HMB
presents no known adv erse ef fects.
β-Hydroxy- β-methylbutyrate is most effective when an
adequate training stimulus is provided. For untrained
individuals, this does not likely require high-vo lume
training. For trained individuals, a high-intensity, high-
volume resistance training program is likely neede d for
benefits to be realized with HMB supplementation.
Nutritional Muscle Buffers
During high-intensi ty anaer obic exercise, a significant accumulation
of hydrogen ions (H+) is coupled with a reducti on of pH within
skeletal muscle and has been shown to adversely affect performance
(182). The ability to regulate H+ concentration in skeletal muscle
during high-intensi ty exercise has been termed muscle buffe ring
capacity (MBC) . There is a strong positive relationship between
MBC and exercise performance (repeated-sprint ability, high-intensi ty
exercise capaci ty, anaer obic threshold, and training volume) (62). In
fact, resear chers have demon strated a positive relationsh ip between
exercise performance and MBC in athletes who participate in sports
such as basketball, soccer, hockey, cycling, crew (rowing), triathlons,
and sprinting (62). In theory , improving MBC by training or
nutritional means (β-alanine, sodium bicarbonate, or citrate) would
706
improve performance in sports and activities that may be limited by
H+ buildup. Therefore, a brief review of β-alanine, sodium
bicarbonate, and sodium citrate and their effects on high-intensi ty
exercise perf ormance f ollows.
β-Alanine
β-Alanine is a nonessential amino acid that is common in many foods
that we eat, such as chicken. By itself, β-alanine has limited
ergogenic properties. Howev er, in muscle cells, it is the rate-limiting
substr ate for carnosine synthesis (59). Harris and colleagues (104)
reported that four weeks of supplementing with β-alanine (4-6
g/day) resulted in a mean increase of 64% in skeletal muscle β-
alanine concentr ations. In humans, carnosine is found primari ly in
fast-twitch (type II) skeletal muscle and is estimated to contribute
up to 40% of the skeletal MBC of H+ produced during intense
anaer obic exercise, thus encour aging a drop in pH (104, 109).
Theor etically, increasing skeletal muscle carnosine levels through
chronic training or β-alanine supplementation (or both) would
improve MBC and most likely improve anaer obic performance.
Interestingly , carnosine concentr ations in athletes such as sprinters
and bodybui lders appear to be significantly higher than those in
marathoners, untr ained individuals, and older people (104 , 202).
Suzuki and colleagues (202)  examined the relationship between
skeletal muscle carnosine levels and high-intensi ty exercise
performance in trained cyclists. The authors reported a significant
and positive relationship between carnosine concentr ation and mean
power in a 30-second maximal sprint on a cycle ergometer . This
finding supported the theory that skeletal muscle carnosine levels
have a positive correlation with anaer obic performance because of
the relationship between carnosine and MB C.
Efficacy
β-Alanine has been studied for its effects on strength, aerobic power ,
and high-intensi ty short-term exercises interspersed with short
recovery interv als. In contrast to creatine, β-alanine does not seem
707
to improve maximal strength (127). Similarly, aerobic power does
not appear to be improved with β-alanine supplementation (127).
Even though aerobic power is not improved, supporting data indicate
that anaerobic threshold is improved with β-alanine supplementation
(226). Practical ly, improving anaer obic threshold (as measured by
the lactate and ventilatory thresholds) means that endur ance
activities can be performed at relatively higher intensi ties for longer
periods. Hill and colleagues (109) examined the effect of β-alanine
supplementation on muscle carnosine levels and exercise
performance in untrained subjects. In a double-bl ind fashion, 25
male subjects (19-31 yr) supplemented with either 4.0 grams β-
alanine or sugar placebo for the first week, then with up to 6.4
grams for an additional nine weeks. Muscle carnosine levels (via
muscle biopsy) and total work done (kilojoules) were measur ed at
weeks 0, 4, and 10 during cycling to exhaustion at maximal power
establ ished from a graded exercise cycle ergometry test. Mean
carnosine levels increased by 58% at week 4 and an additional 15%
at week 10. Additional ly, 13% and 16% increases in total work done
during cy cle er gometry wer e seen at weeks 4 and 10, r espectiv ely.
In a compr ehensiv e review summarizing the effects of β-alanine
supplementation on high-intensi ty performance, Artioli and
colleagues (9) stated that β-alanine ingest ion is capable of improving
performance in exercises resulting in an extreme intramuscular
acidotic environment, such as multiple bouts of high-intensi ty
exercises lasting more than 60 seconds, as well as single bouts
undertak en when fatigue is already present. High-intensi ty exercises
performed with a lower level of acidosis are unlikely to benefi t from
β-alanine supplementation.
Adverse Effects
In the published literature, β-alanine ingestion has ranged  from 2.4
to 6.4 grams per day. In many β-alanine trials, the total daily
amount of β-alanine ingest ion was divided into two to four smaller
doses. The reason for the smaller dosing strategies is to prevent the
only reported adverse effect of β-alanine supplementation, which is
708
the symptom of paresthesia (tingling, pricking, or numbness of a
person’ s skin) (9). Symptoms  of paresthesia are trigger ed by a high
and acute single dose and disappear within approximat ely 1 hour
after the ingestion (9, 104).
Sodium Bicarbonate
Sodium bicarbonate is an antacid (alkal inizing agent), meaning that
it counteracts or neutralizes acid (low pH). Sodium bicarbonate is
naturally formed in the body and is also found in baking soda.
Supplementation with sodium bicarbonate has been shown to
increase the pH of blood (198). A pH difference is created between
the inside and outside of muscle cells that causes an accelerated
movement of H+ out of the contracting muscle, helping to regulate
intramuscular pH. Supplemen ting with sodium bicarbonate has been
shown to improve MBC and in turn high-intensi ty exercise
performance.
Efficacy
Most resear ch investigating the efficacy of sodium bicarbonate for
enhancing sport performance has focused on short bouts of high-
intensi ty exercise lasting 60 seconds to 6 minutes (150).
McNaughton and colleagues  (148) have demonstr ated improved
short-term, high-intensi ty work from acute sodium bicarbonate
supplementation. Hobson and colleagues (111) examined the effects
of sodium bicarbonate ingestion during a 2,000-meter (2,187 yd)
rowing ergome ter time trial in experienced male rowers. The rowers
were supplemented before exercise with 0.3 grams per kilogram
body mass of sodium bicarb onate or a placebo . Time to complete
the 2,000 meters and time taken for each 500-meter (547 yd) split
were recorded. While there were no significant differences in the
overall 2,000-m eter time trial, the sodium bicarbonate did result in
significant improvements in the third and final 500-meter time splits.
Some investigations (26, 140), but not all (10), have reported similar
improvements in high-intensi ty exercise following 0.3 grams per
kilogram body mass sodium bicarbonate supplementation. The
709
timing of the sodium bicarbonate ingestion used in many scienti fic
investigations is typical ly 60 to 90 minutes before the bout of
exercise.
Adverse Effects
It appears that a dosage of 0.3 grams per kilogram body mass (136
mg/lb body mass) sodium bicarbonate ingested approximately 60 to
180 minutes before activity improves short-duration, high-intensi ty
exercise performance (97, 111, 150). Dosages above this amount
have been associated with unpleasant side effects such as diarrhea,
cramping, nausea, and vomiting. A more tolerable dose (0.2 g/kg
[91 mg/lb] body weight) has been shown to reduce these side
effects; howev er, resear ch has revealed that this dose does not
improve exercise performance (139). It appears that a sodium
bicarbonate dose ranging from 0.3 to 0.5 grams per kilogram body
mass, 60 to 180 minutes before exercise, is optimal for improvement
of performance  (97). Due to the severity of the side effects (which
may be experienced by some athletes even when ingesting 0.3 g/kg
body mass), many sport scientists recommend that athletes try
sodium bicarbonate supplementation during practice before using it
as a pr ecompeti tion aid.
Sodium Citrate
Although sodium citrate is not actual ly a base, it can increase blood
pH without the gastrointestin al distress that is commonly seen with
sodium bicarbonate supplementation (211). It is believed that once
in the blood, sodium citrate actual ly breaks down into bicarbonate,
thus increasing the extracellular pH. As a result, sodium citrate
would help regulate intramus cular pH during high-intensi ty exercise
by the same mechanism as sodium bicarbonate.
Efficacy
The data are equiv ocal in terms of the effectiveness of sodium
citrate’s ergogenic potential during short-duration, high-intensi ty
exercise, with some investigations reporting no benefi t (13, 211) and
710
others having observ ed an ergogenic effect (141, 149). For example,
a dose of 200 milligrams per pound body mass (0.44 g/kg body
weight) given 60 to 90 minutes before exercise led to significant
improvement (about 20% greater) in leg muscular endur ance during
maximal isometric knee extensions (105). Howev er, more resear ch is
needed before sodium citrate can be recommended before a
workout or competi tion for perf ormance enhancement.
Adverse Effects
Sodium citrate may possess MBC and has been used without the
typical gastrointestinal discomfort usually associated with sodium
bicarbonate ingestion (13, 141). Even though it appear s that the
adverse effects of sodium citrate supplementation are lower than
those of sodium bicarbonat e, ingestion of 0.4 to 0.6 grams per
kilogram body mass sodium  citrate has the potential to cause
gastrointestinal distress (161). The gastrointestinal response seems
to vary between individuals; therefore, athletes should individual ly
test sodium ci trate supplementation bef ore using i t in competi tion.
L-Carnitine
L-carni tine is synthesiz ed from the amino acids lysine and
methionine and is responsible for the transport of fatty acids from
the cytosol into the mitochondria to be oxidized for energy.
Carnitine’s role in lipid oxidation has gener ated interest in its efficacy
as a dietary supplement , primari ly to enhance exercise performance
by increasing fat use and sparing muscle glycogen. Howev er, studies
examining L-carnitine’s role as an ergogenic aid for increasing lipid
oxidation and subsequently enhancing performance are inconsistent
(85). Although Bacurau and colleagues (11) showed enhanced fatty
acid oxidation following three weeks of L-carni tine supple mentation,
which was attributed to a greater carnitine content in the muscle,
most studies have been unable to demonstr ate elevated muscle
carnitine levels following supplementation (218). This may be related
to limits in the amount of carnitine that can be absorbe d through
oral supplementation, or potentially related to limits in the amount of
711
fat that can be transporte d into the mitochondria through the
carnitine system due to feedback regulators within the muscle, such
as malon yl–coenzyme A, which is a pr oduct of metabol ism.
Efficacy
Interestingly , several studies  have suggested that L-carni tine may
enhance recovery from exercise (119, 216). Decreases in pain and
muscle damage (84), decreases in markers of metabol ic stress
(195), and enhanced recovery (216) have also been demonstr ated
following high-intensi ty resistance exercise in untrained or
recreational ly trained individu als who supplemented with L-carni tine.
The mechanisms that have been proposed involve enhancing blood
flow regulation through an enhanced vasodilatory effect that reduces
the magnitude of exercise-induced hypoxia (120). In addition,
Kraemer and colleagues indicated that L-carni tine supplementation
(2 g/day for three weeks) upregulates androgen receptors (132) and
increases IGF binding proteins that preserv e IGF-1 concentr ations
(133). These endocrine adaptations from the supplement may have
an important role in the enhanced recovery seen following high-
intensi ty exercise.
Adverse Effects
Up to 3 grams of daily L-carnitine supplementation (for three weeks)
appears to be well tolerated in healthy volunteers, with no adverse
subjectiv e, hematological, or metabol ic events reported (183).
Howev er, as with most supplements, this information should not be
extrapolated to suggest the safety of greater dosing or of use for
prolonged supplementation periods.
Creatine
Creatine  is a nitrogenous organic compound that is synthesiz ed
naturally in the body, prima rily in the liver, and helps to supply
energy to all cells in the body. It can also be synthesiz ed in smaller
amounts in both the kidneys and pancr eas. The amino acids
712
arginine, glycine, and methionine are the precursors for the
synthesis of creatine in those organs. Creatine can also be obtained
through dietary sources. It is found in relative abundance in both
meat and fish. Approximate ly 98% of creatine is stored within
skeletal muscle  in either its free form (40%) or its phosphorylated
form (60%). Smaller amoun ts of creatine are also stored in the
heart, brain, and testes. Creatine is transported from its site of
synthesis to the sk eletal muscle via cir culation.
Importance of Creatine to Exercise
Creatine, in the form of creatine phosphate (CP; also called
phosphocr eatine [PCr]), has an essential role in energy metabol ism
as a substr ate for the formation of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) by
rephosphorylating adenosine diphosphate (ADP), especial ly during
short-duration, high-intensi ty exercise. The ability to rapidly
rephosphorylate ADP is dependent on the enzyme creatine kinase
and the availability of CP within the muscle. As CP stores become
depleted, the ability to perform high-intensi ty exercise declines. In
short-duration sprints (e.g., a 100 m sprint), the energy for fueling
the activity is derived primari ly through the hydrolysis of CP.
Howev er, as high-intensi ty exercise increases in duration, the ability
of CP to serv e as an ener gy sour ce is dr astical ly reduced.
Depletion of muscle CP during high-intensi ty exercise is the
primary mecha nism leading to fatigue in such events. During a 6-
second bout of maximal exercise, CP levels within the muscle are
reduced 35% to 57% from resting levels (81). As the duration of
high-intensi ty exercise increases to 30 seconds, CP levels in the
muscle are further reduced by approximately 64% to 80% from
resting levels (28, 40); during bouts of repeated high-intensi ty
exercise, CP levels in the muscle are almost completely depleted
(147). As muscle CP concentr ations decrease, the ability to perform
maximal exercise is reduced. Hirvonen and colleagues (110)
demonstr ated that sprint times were slower as CP concentr ations
were reduced. It stands to reason that if muscle CP concentr ations
713
could be maintained, the ability to sustain high-intensi ty exercise
would be improved. This is the basis for creatine supplementation in
athletes.
Creatine Supplementation
Survey-based studies suggest that the prevalence of creatine use
among athletes and military personnel is about 15% to 40%, with
use more common in male strength or power athletes (134). As a
result of their widespr ead use, creatine supplements may be the
most extensiv ely studied ergogenic aid in recent history . Creatine
supplementation is reported to increase the creatine content of
muscles by approximately 20% (65, 121). Howev er, it appears that a
saturation limit for creatine exists within muscle. Once creatine
concentr ations in skeletal muscle reach 150 to 160 mmol per
kilogram dry weight, additional supplementation appears to be
unable to further increase muscle creatine concentr ations (92). This
has important implications for the “more is better” philosoph y that
governs the thinking of some athletes and may affect the
development of pr oper and r ealistic dosing str ategies.
A typical creatine supplementation regimen involves a loading
dose of 20 to 25 grams daily for five days, or 0.3 grams per kilogram
body mass if an individual wishes to dose relative to body weight,
followed by a maintenance dose of 2 grams per day (121). If one
ingests creatine without an initial loading dose, muscle creatine
content will reach levels similar to those seen in people who do
initially use a loading dose, but reaching that muscle creatine
concentr ation will take longer (~30 days vs. 5 days). Muscle creatine
levels will remain elevated as long as the maintenance dose is
maintained (2 g/day or 0.03 g/kg body mass per day) (121). Once
creatine supplementation is stopped, muscle creatine levels will
return to basel ine lev els in appr oximately f our weeks (65, 121).
While most of the available resear ch involving creatine
supplementation has focused on skeletal muscle, a small body of
accumulating resear ch has focused on creatine and potential
714
cogni tive benefits. Creatine  supplementation can increase brain
creatine conten t in humans, but higher and more prolonged dosing
strategies than those typical ly used to increase muscle creatine
levels are required to increase brain creatine (57). At this time, the
optimal dosing strategies needed to induce this response are
currently unknown, but this is an active area of resear ch. It appears
that creatine is most likely to exert an influence in situations where
cogni tive processes are stressed (e.g., during sleep depriv ation,
experimental hypoxia, and cogni tively demanding tasks).
Furthermor e, creatine has shown some promise for attenuating
symptoms of concussion, mild traumatic brain injury , and depression
(72).
Efficacy
Most studies examining the effect of creatine supplementation on
strength performance have been fairly consistent in showing
significant ergogenic benefi ts (figure 12.5) (217). Strength increases
in the bench press, squat, and power clean may be two to three
times higher in trained athletes supplementing with creatine
compar ed to placebo (113). These results may highlight the benefi t
of creatine supplementatio n in experienced resistan ce-trained
athletes whose potential to improve strength may be limited. In
experienced strength athletes , supplementing with creatine may also
enhance the quality of workouts (less fatigue, enhanced recovery),
which may be crucial for providing a greater training stimulus to the
muscle.
715
FIGURE 12.5 Appr oximate changes in performance variables following creatine
supplementation.
Data from Wax et al. (2021).
Creatine supplementation has been shown to increase
maximal strength, power, and lean body mass in both
trained and untrained populations. Additionally, creatine
supplementation is safe and relatively inexpensive.
Most studies examining the effects of creatine supplementation on
a single bout of explosiv e exercise (sprint performance)  have not
shown any significant performance improvements (129, 155).
Howev er, in many of these studies, subjects were supplemented with
a loading dose for only five days (129, 155). While ingesting creatine
with a loading dose for five days will significantly increase
intramuscular creatine stores, this is likely not enough  time for
training adaptations to occur and to be manifested in explosiv e
exercise performance improvements. When subjects have
supplemented for an extended period of time (28-84 days),
significant improvements in jump and power performance have been
716
seen (215). It appears that creatine is more effective as a training
supplement than as a dir ect perf ormance enhancer .
Body Mass Changes
Prolonged creatine suppleme ntation has been gener ally associated
with increases in body weight. These increases appear to primari ly
relate to increases in fat-free mass. The increase in body mass is
believed to be partly related to an increase in total body water. The
water retention phenomenon occurs in the early stages (first several
days) of supplementation (102). An increase in creatine content
within the muscle is thought to enhance the intracellular osmotic
gradient, causing water to fill the cell (8). In gener al, creatine
supplementation during training is typical ly associated with a 1- to 4-
pound (0.5-1.8 kg) greater increase in body mass or fat-free mass
(71) o ver a period of sev eral weeks to sev eral months.
Adverse Effects
Increase in body mass could be a potential unwanted side effect of
creatine supple mentation, particularly in relation to strength-to-mass
or power -to-m ass ratio. Howev er, in athletes suppleme nting with
creatine, weigh t gain is often a desired outcome. When people talk
about side effects from a drug or supplement, they are gener ally
referring to a potential ly debilitating effect. There have been many
anecdotal reports of gastrointestinal, cardiovascular , and muscular
problems, including muscle cramps, in association with creatine
ingestion. Howev er, controlled studies have been unable to
document any significant side effects from creatine supple mentation.
Even during prolonged supplementation (several weeks up to many
months), no increases in reported side effects were noted in subjects
supplementing with creatine—ei ther competi tive athletes or
recreational ly trained individuals (8).
Another concern with any supplement is the long-term health
effects. A retrospectiv e study on health variables in 26 former or
current compe titive athletes who had used creatine for up to four
717
years indicated only occasional gastrointestinal upset during the
loading phase (185). These disturbances ranged from gas to mild
diarrhea. Other hypothesiz ed major concerns during creatine
supplementation include a strain on the kidneys due to the high
nitrogen content of creatine and increased creatine excretion during
short-term ingestion. Howev er, no renal dysfunction has been
reported with either short-term (five days) or long-term (up to five
years) cr eatine use (170, 171).
Despite certain media and anecdotal reports linking
creatine supplementation to dehydration and cramping,
there is no reason to believe that creatine enhances the
risk for these side effects.
Stimulants
There is little question about the usefulness of stimulants to many
types of athletic endea vors; the effects of stimulants include reduced
fatigue, increased alertness, increased confidence, and even
euphoria. Because stimulants have to be used at the time of
competi tion to confer an ergogenic advantage, drug testing
performed immediately after the competi tion can effectively reduce
their abuse (118). Howev er, many stimulants (e.g., caffeine) are also
available in food items, while others (e.g., ephedrine) may be found
in decongestants and other medications.
Caffeine
Caffeine  is a multifaceted supplem ent used in athletics and is
popular amon g both aerobic endur ance and resistance training
athletes. It is found in coffee, tea, soft drinks, chocolate, and various
other foods. It is a central nervous system stimulant, and its effects
are similar to, yet weaker than, those associated with
amphetamines. Caffeine has been used as a performance enhancer
for more than 40 years and is one of the few ergogenic aids that
may be used compar ably b y aerobic and anaer obic athletes.
718
The mechanism to explain endur ance improvements is unclear .
One of the mechanisms that has been proposed involves an increase
in fat oxidation through the mobilization of free fatty acids from
adipose tissue or intramuscu lar fat stores (90). The greater use of
fat as a primar y energy source slows glycogen depletion and delays
fatigue. Alterations in muscle metabol ism alone cannot fully explain
the ergogenic effect of caffeine. During short-duration, high-intensi ty
exercise, the primary ergogenic effect attributed to caffeine
supplementation is enhanced power production. This is thought to
be the result of an enhanced excitation–contr action  coupl ing,
affecting neuromuscular transmission and mobilization of
intracellular calcium ions f rom the sar coplasmic r eticulum (90).
Efficacy
For the aerobic athlete, caffeine is thought to prolong aerobic
endur ance exercise (221). Initial studies dealing with the effect of
caffeine supplementation on aerobic endur ance performance
indicated a 21-minute improvement in the time to exhaustion (from
75 min in a placebo trial to 96 min in the caffeine trial) during
cycling at 80% of V̇O2max (49). These results were confirmed by
other investigations demonstr ating the ergogenic effect of caffeine
during prolong ed aerobic endur ance activity (17). These studies
showed that caffeine in doses ranging from 3 to 9 milligrams per
kilogram (equivalent to approximately 1.5 to 3.5 cups of automatic
drip coffee in a 70 kg [154 lb] person) produced a significant
ergogenic effect. Similar performance effects from caffeine have also
been demonst rated during short-duration, high-intensi ty exercise
(34, 58).
When the effects of caffeine ingestion on sprint or power
performance are examined, howev er, the ergogenic benefi ts become
less clear. Several studies have shown that caffeine ingestion does
not improve power performance (46, 96), but those studies used
recreational athletes. In elite judo athletes ingesting caffeine (5
mg/kg), it was reported that peak power was significantly improved
in comparison wi th a placebo tr eatment (194).
719
Similarly, in competi tive swimmers, caffeine ingestion (250 mg)
was shown to improve sprint  times during repeated 100-meter (109
yd) sprints by an average of 3% (47). The number of studies on
caffeine ingestion and sprint and power performance is limited
compar ed to the number that measur ed caffeine’s effect on aerobic
endur ance performance. Thus, the results of the studies on the
ergogenic benefit of caffeine for power performance are
inconclusiv e. If any performance benefi t occurs, it is likely in the
trained athlete.
Caffeine from a food source (coffee consumption) and anhydrous
caffeine have both shown significant performance effects; howev er,
the extent of performance improvements appears to be greater
when caffeine is ingested in tablet form (91). When caffeine is
provided as a pure caffeine supplement, the ergogenic benefi t with
respect to improved aerobic endur ance performance has been
reported to range between 28% and 43% (91). Howev er, when it is
provided in a food source such as coffee (either caffeinate d coffee or
decaf feinated coffee with added caffeine), the ergogenic benefi t for
aerobic endur ance exercise may not be seen (91). Graham and
colleagues (91) suggested that although the bioavailability of
caffeine is the same whether it is consumed in a food source or in an
anhydrous form, some compound in coffee antagoniz es the action of
caffeine.
In doses of 3 to 9 milligrams per kilogram body weight
consumed approximately 60 minutes before exercise or
during prolo nged exerci se, caffeine is ergogeni c. No
further benefit is observed when it is consumed at
higher dosages (≥9 mg/kg). It can decrease feelings of
perceived exertion, impro ve work capacity, and increase
mental alertness. The scientific literature does not
support caffeine-induced diuresis during exercise or any
harmful change in fluid balance that would nega tively
affect performance.
720
Adverse Effects
The side effects associated with caffeine include anxiet y,
gastrointestinal disturbances , restlessness, insomnia, tremors, and
heart arrhythmias. Caffeine is also physical ly addicting, and
discontinuation can result in some withdrawal symptoms, such as
headache, fatigue, dysphoric mood, difficulty concentr ating, and flu-
like somatic symptoms (200). Caffeine intakes greater than 9
milligrams per kilogram appear to result in a greater risk for side
effects (99). Caffeine overdose is an issue that can have potential ly
fatal consequences. A lethal dose of caffeine is typical ly in excess of
5 grams, which equates to about 42 cups of coffee at 120 milligrams
of caffeine per cup (128) or twent y-five 200-mi lligram tablets of
caffeine.
Preworkout Energy Drinks
Energy drinks were initially introduced to the market in the United
States in the 1990s and have since become one of the biggest
selling functional beverages in the industry with annual sales
projected to surpass $21 billion by the year 2026 (123). The primary
reasons for ingesting energy drinks include enhancing workouts,
improving sport performance, and facilitating faster training
adaptations (168). The ingredients most common to commer cially
available energy drinks are caffeine, taurine, ginseng, guarana,
carboh ydrates, B vitamins, tyrosine, and ginkgo biloba, among
others. Of these ingredients, caffeine and carboh ydrate are the
primary er gogenic nutrients in ener gy drinks (123).
Efficacy
Prework out energy drinks have been investigated for their
effectiveness on several modes of exercise, including resistance
exercise, anaer obic exercise, and aerobic endur ance exercise. In
relation to resistance exercise performance, Forbes and colleagues
(70) gave 15 physical ly active college-aged students a commer cially
available energy drink or an isocaloric noncaf feinated placebo 60
minutes before exercise. The energy drink was standar dized with 2
721
milligrams of caffeine per kilogram body mass. The exercise bout
consisted of 3 sets of 70% 1RM bench press conducted to failure on
each set with 1 minute of rest between each set. The energy drink
significantly increased bench press performance as compar ed to the
placebo treatment. Other studies investigating the effects of
prework out energy drink consumption have also reported
improvements in upper and lower body total lifting volume (54, 86).
While it appea rs that prework out energy drink ingestion is effective
for increasing resistance training volume performance, other types of
anaer obic exercise (including Wingate tests and speed or agility
performance) are not as responsiv e to energy drink consumption
(70, 114). In terms of aerobic endur ance exercise performance,
some investiga tions (122), but not all (36), have reported that
energy drinks containing approximately 2 milligrams of caffeine per
kilogram body mass, consumed within an hour before exercise,
improve cycling and running performance in trained cyclists and
recreational ly active individu als (123). Interestingly , the amount of
caffeine (2 mg/kg body mass) in the energy drinks is less than the
amount recom mended for an enhancement of exercise performance
(3-9 mg/kg body mass). This contributes to the hypothesis that the
syner gistic effects of the various ingredients in energy drinks may be
responsible for the reported improvements in exercise performance
(123).
Adverse Effects
The safety issues surroundi ng energy drink consumpti on appear
related to excessiv e caffeine intake (187) and the detrime ntal effects
of mixing energy drinks with alcohol (187). The mixing of energy
drinks with alcohol is more prevalent in certain social contexts and is
not a common  practice for those consuming energy drinks before a
workout to enhance work capaci ty or to facilitate faster training
adaptations. Due to the presence of caffeine in most energy drinks,
the same potential adverse effects that exist for caffeine also exist
for energy drinks. Howev er, most energy drinks contain only
moder ate amounts of caffeine, typical ly less than 300 milligrams
722
(187). Even though energy drinks typical ly contain low to moder ate
doses of caffeine, one should recogniz e that it is possible to
overdose on caffeine through the consumption of energy drinks
(116). While there is some information related to the side effects of
excess caffeine ingestion, energy drinks contain other ingredients
and stimulants . Currently, it is unknown whether inclusion of other
stimulants in energy drinks may increase or decrease the threshold
for experiencing side effects. Therefore, more resear ch is needed to
determine the long-term effects of habitual intake of energy drinks
before defini tive conclusions can be dr awn.
Ephedrine
Another stimulant, ephedrine, has been widely used throughout the
world for temporary relief from the symptoms of bronchial asthma,
bronchi tis, allergies, shortnes s of breath, cold and flu symptoms, and
other ailments. Ephedrine is also very popular among bodybui lders
due to its strong thermogenic quality. A thermogenic supplement or
drug works by elevating basal metabol ic rate, thereby increasing
energy expendi ture and ultimately resulting in fat loss. It often is
used as a stacking agent with caffeine to enhance the thermogenic
effect.
Efficacy
Studies examining the ergogenic effect of ephedrine have shown it
to be effective only when it is taken in combination with caffeine
(21). These results have been quite consistent with regard to
improving aerobic endur ance performance (20). In terms of
anaer obic exercise performan ce, the scienti fic literature investigating
the combination of ephedrine and caffeine is equiv ocal (224).
Howev er, side effects (vomiting and nausea) following exercise have
been reported in 25% of the subjects ingesting a mixture of 5
milligrams per kilogram caffeine and 1 milligram per kilogram
ephedrine (19). A subsequent study performed by the same
investigators showed that at a lower dose (4 mg/kg caffeine and 0.8
723
mg/kg ephedrine), similar ergogenic benefi ts were realized with no
side ef fects (20).
Adverse Effects
Ephedr a, also called ma huang , is a plant that contains ephedrine. In
the United States before 2004, most over-the-counter sport and
weight -loss products contained ephedr a. Howev er, in April 2004, the
FDA banned all products containing ephedr a after determi ning that it
posed an unreasonable risk to those who used it. The FDA ban was
based on a report published by the Rand Institute (188) indicating
that 16,000 adverse events were linked to the use of ephedr a-
containing dietary supplements. Further , Shekelle and colleagues
(188) reported that the use of ephedr a-containing dietary
supplements or ephedrine plus caffeine was associated with an
increased incidence of nausea, vomiting, psychiatric symptoms such
as anxiet y and change in mood, autonomic hyperactivity,
palpitations, and, in a few cases, death. As a result of the many
adverse effects, ephedrine use has been banned by most sport
governing bodies, including the I nternational Olympic Commi ttee.
Citrus Aurantium
Citrus aurantium is from a fruit commonly known as bitter orange
and is often used as an Asian herbal medicine to treat digestiv e
problems (80, 100). Howev er, it is also a mild stimulant and is
thought to contribute to appeti te suppr ession and increased
metabol ic rate and l ipolysis (80, 100).
Efficacy
When citrus aurantium is combined with caffeine and other herbal
products, significant improvements in time to fatigue have been
reported (199). Citrus aurantium contains synephrine, a
sympathomimetic agent, which some have suggested stimulates
specific beta adrenergic receptors (β-3, but not β-1 or β-2) that in
turn stimulate fat metabol ism without any of the negativ e side
effects gener ally associated with compounds that stimulate the other
724
adrenergic receptors (38). Synephrine, a known active component of
citrus aurantium, is thought to interact with β-3 receptors to increase
lipolysis (i.e., the breakdown of body fat) and minimiz e the
cardiovascular effect typical of adrenergic amines (38). Currently, not
enough data on citrus aurantium alone have been published to
recommend i ts use as a perf ormance-enhancing supplement.
Adverse Effects
Synephrine has been shown to stimulate peripher al α-1 receptors,
resulting in vasoconstriction and elevations in blood pressure (31).
Howev er, other resear ch has shown that when citrus aurantium is
ingested alone, no effect on blood pressure is seen (103), but in
combination with other herbal products it may cause significant
elevations in systol ic blood pressure (103). It should be noted that
synephrine is currently on the National Collegiat e Athletic
Association’ s banned l ist of perf ormance-enhancing drugs.
Summary of Ergogenic and Non-Ergogenic
Dietary Supplements and Their Application
Essential amino acids and branched-chain amino acids . Ability to
stimulate muscle protein synthesis, particularly via the anabol ic effects of the
amino acid leucine
Arginine . Not effective for inducing nitric oxide or muscle blood flow in
healthy individuals;  also does not appear to have any effect on improving
endur ance perf ormance in heal thy populations
β-Hydroxy- β-methylbutyrate (HMB) . Most effective for trained
individuals participating in a high-intensi ty, high-volume resistance training
program
β-Alanine . Effective as a performance-enhancing substance in exercises
inducing a high level of lactic acid, such as multiple bouts of high-intensi ty
exercises lasting mor e than 60 seconds
Sodium bicarbonate . Has been shown to improve high-intensi ty exercise
performance and training but is associated with unpleasant side effects
consistent with gastrointestinal discomf ort, which would likely decrease
performance
725
Sodium citrate . Inconclusiv e scienti fic data in relation to sodium citrate’s
ergogenic potential during short -duration, high-intensi ty exercise
L-carnitine . May enhance recovery following high-intensi ty resistance
exercise
Creatine . Effective for increasing maximal strength, power , lean body mass,
and sprint performance in both trained and untrained populations; no other
sport supplement is supported b y the same lev el of posi tive resear ch
Caffeine . Effective for prolonging aerobic endur ance exercise, but its effects
on sprint or power perf ormance ar e less clear
Preworkout energy drinks . Effective for increasing resistance training
volume performance and endur ance performance but not ergogenic in their
ability to improve anaer obic exercise (high-intensi ty cycling and speed or
agility perf ormance)
Ephedrine . When combined with caffeine, is able to improve aerobic
endur ance performance; not as effective in improving anaer obic exercise
performance
Citrus aurantium . When combined with caffeine and other herbal products,
improvements in exercise time to fatigue (a measur e of endur ance
performance) ha ve been r eported
726
Conclusion
Athletes are frequently exposed to information about ergogenic aids.
Strength and condi tioning professionals play an integr al part in the
decision-making process regarding which ergogenic aids athletes
choose to take. Therefore, it is imper ative that strength and
condi tioning professionals stay up to date on the latest scienti fic
findings on what ergogenic aids are safe, effective, and legal. If
strength and condi tioning professionals fail in this area, the athletes
they serve will be more susceptible to hyped marketing, potential ly
false advertising, and influen ce by others who may not have the
athlete’ s best interests in mind. The information contained in this
chapter serves the strength and condi tioning professional by
providing fundamental information on performance-enhancing
substances, including which substances are banned, effective or
nonef fective, and saf e.
KEY TERMS
acromegaly
anabol ic ster oid
androgenic
β-agonists
β-block ers
β-hydroxy-β-meth ylbutyrate (HMB)
branched-chain amino acids (B CAA)
caffeine
creatine
dietary supplement
ergogenic aid
ergolytic
erythr opoietin (EPO)
essential amino acids (EAA)
human chorionic gonadotr opin (HCG)
727
human gr owth hormone (HGH)
insulin
lipolysis
muscle buf fering capaci ty (MB C)
muscle dysmorphia
peptides
random drug tests
selectiv e andr ogen r eceptor modulators (S ARMs)
stacking
testoster one
thermogenesis
vasodilation
STUDY QUESTIONS
  1.  Which of the following hormones is responsible for enhancing
the abi lity to del iver oxygen to contr acting sk eletal muscle?
  a.  erythr opoietin
  b.  insul in
  c.  human gr owth hormone
  d.  testoster one
  2.  What are the effects of evening binge alcohol consumption on
sleep and autonomic f unction?
  a.  It impr oves sleep qual ity, increases car diac v agal tone, and
impairs blood pr essure regulation.
  b.  It has no signi ficant impact on sleep or autonomic
function.
  c.  It disrupts sleeping car diac v agal tone, r educes sleep
quality, increases sympathoex citation, and disrupts blood
pressure regulation.
  d.  It impr oves blood pr essure regulation and r educes
sympathoex citation during sleep .
  3.  What organization prohibits the use of SARMs in and outside
of competi tion for all athletes?
728