# Section 12.3

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 12: Performance-Enhancing Substances and Methods

**Section:** 12.3 -- Dietary Supplements

**PDF Pages:** 701--720

key amino acid for stimulating muscle protein synthesis (126) via the
Akt/mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway (figure 12.4).
Norton and cowork ers (159) demonstr ated in rodent models that a
leucine threshold for stimulating muscle protein synthesis exists.
Based on this pioneering resear ch, many nutrition resear chers now
believe that the leucine content in any given protein intake is the
rate-limiting factor in terms of maximizing muscle protein synthesis
within the capaci ty of skeletal muscle rather than simply the total
amount of protein ingested. To support this theory of the importance
of the content of a protein meal, Pasiakos and colleagues (166)
reported that a leucine-enriched EAA beverage resulted in a
significant elevation of muscle protein synthesis compar ed to a
normal leucine-containing EAA beverage. In this study, trained males
ingested one of two different 10-gr am EAA beverages during cycling
exercise—one containing 3.5 grams of leucine (46 mg/kg body
mass) and the other containing 1.87 grams of leucine (~25 mg/kg
body mass). After the exercise bout (during a 3-hr assessment
period), muscl e protein synthesis was 33% greater in the leucine-
enriched EAA beverage. The importance of leucine intake and its role
in the anabol ic response of skeletal muscle following resistance
training continues to be a popular topic in sports nutrition resear ch
today.
FIGURE 12.4  Role of leucine in muscle pr otein synthesis.
701
The branche d-chain amino acid leucine is a key
regulator in stimulating muscle protein synthesis.
Leucine directly activate s the Akt/mTOR pathw ay in
skeletal muscle, which is a key pathway in skeletal
muscle protein synthesis.
Adverse Effects
No known reports or scienti fic studies have investigated the adverse
effects of br anched-chain amino acid or EAA supplementation.
Arginine
Arginine is a condi tional ly essential amino acid and has crucial roles
in nutrition and metabol ism. Arginine is required for the synthesis of
protein and creatine, and its metabol ism results in the production of
nitric oxide. The claims often attributed to arginine supplementation
are its ability to elevate nitric oxide levels, increase muscle blood
flow, and improve exercise performance. Each of these claims is
directed at athletes or physical ly active individuals, because these
are all outcomes that would be beneficial for enhancing sport
performance or maximizing training adaptations. Unfortunately ,
there is very little scienti fic evidence supporting these claims
regarding arginine supplementation in the populations that these
outcomes would benefi t.
Efficacy
Oral arginine supplementation is most often marketed for its
potential to elevate nitric oxide levels. Nitric oxide possesses many
physiological roles in the human body, but its effects on
vasodilation  (i.e., the widening of blood vessels) are what make it
important during exercising condi tions. During exercise, nitric oxide
levels are naturally increased  so that more blood can flow through
the arteries and arterioles for the purpose of delivering oxygen and
fuel substr ates to the working skeletal muscles (27). While nitric
oxide is essential for vasodilation, the overwhelming majori ty of the
702
scienti fic literature does not support the claim that oral arginine
supplementation increases nitric oxide production to levels that are
greater than the effects of exercise alone in healthy individuals (5,
142).
A natural outcome of nitric oxide production is increased muscle
blood flow. Therefore, increasing muscle blood flow is also a popular
claim that is made regarding arginine’ s effectiveness. Despi te the
common perception among athletes and consumers of dietary
supplements that arginine supplementation does increase muscle
blood flow, investigations into this area are in agreement that
muscle blood flow is not increased in healthy individuals following
arginine supple mentation (203). Oral arginine supplemen tation has
also been purported to improve endur ance exercise performance.
Howev er, in resear ch investigating arginine’ s effectiveness in healthy
populations, it was reported that time to exhaustion, local muscular
endur ance, and intermi ttent anaer obic exercise performance were
not improved as a result of supplementation (95, 142, 214). Due to
its inability to increase nitric oxide production, enhance muscle blood
flow, or improve several modes of endur ance exercise, oral arginine
supplementation is not r ecommended f or heal thy athletes.
Adverse Effects
A major ity of the scienti fic investigations in which arginine was given
to participants to improve exercise performance used a 6-gram dose.
While this dose of arginine was not effective in improving endur ance
performance, this amount was well tolerated and posed no adverse
side effects. Oral suppleme ntation at doses up to 13 grams is
gener ally well tolerated. The most common adverse reactions to
higher doses (13-30 g) include gastrointestinal distress consistent
with nausea, abdominal cr amps, and diarrhea (45).
Due to its inability to increase nitric oxide production,
enhance muscle blood flow, or improve endu rance
703
exercise performance, oral arginine supplementation is
not recommended for healthy athletes.
β-Hydroxy-β-Methylbutyrate
β-Hydroxy- β-methylbutyrate (HMB)  is a derivative of the EAA
leucine and its metabol ite α-ketoisocapr oic acid. Evidence shows that
HMB plays a role in the regulation of muscle protein breakdown in
the body (decreases protein breakdown) by inhibi ting the ubiqui tin–
proteasome pathway (193). Due to HMB’s role in the regulation of
protein breakdown, it may be an effective supplement for minimizing
losses of lean muscle mass in situations that promote a catabol ic
state. β-Hydroxy-β-meth ylbutyrate is not currently banned or
restricted b y sport or ganizations.
Efficacy
The initial resear ch study that highlighted HMB’s anticatabol ic
potential was conducted by Nissen and colleagues (158). In this
study, untrained subjects ingested one of three levels of HMB (0,
1.5, or 3.0 g per day) and two protein levels (117 or 175 g per day)
and resistance trained three days per week for three weeks. As a
measur e of myofibrillar protein breakdown, urinary 3-meth yl-
histidine levels were measur ed (higher levels of urinary 3-meth yl-
histidine mean  that more muscle protein is catabol ized, or broken
down). After the first week of the resistance training protocol,
urinary 3-meth yl-histidine was increased by 94% in the control
group and by 85% and 50% in those individuals ingesting 1.5 and 3
grams of HMB per day, respectiv ely. During the second week of the
study, urinary 3-meth yl-histidine levels were still elevated by 27% in
the control group but were 4% and 15% below basal levels for the
1.5 and 3 grams of HMB per day groups. At the end of the third
week of resistance training, urinary 3-meth yl-histidine levels were
not signi ficantly di fferent between the gr oups (158).
Resear ch in other catabol ic-inducing environments has also
demonstr ated the effectiveness of HMB supplementation. For
704
example, when  older adults were confined to complete bed rest (a
catabol ic state) for 10 days, it was reported that the subjects who
were supplemented with 3 grams of HMB per day lost significantly
less lean body mass (lost only 0.37 lb [0.17 kg]) as compar ed to
those subjects  who were supplemented with a placebo (lost 4.5 lb
[2.04 kg]) (55). Other resear ch findings are in agreement with these
observ ations and have shown that HMB exerts an anticatabol ic effect
and suppr esses muscle damage (130).
In previously untrained individuals initiating a resistance training
program lasting four to eight weeks, HMB has been shown to exert
significantly greater improvements in strength and lean body mass
as compar ed to a placebo (158, 164). The muscle damage and
soreness that result from resistance training are predictably greater
in those who have little training experience as compar ed to
individuals who have engaged in resistance training for longer
periods of time. Given HMB’s ability to suppr ess muscle damage and
muscle protein breakdown, it is not surprising that HMB is effective
for people beginning a new tr aining pr ogram.
The ergogenic  effects of HMB in trained individuals are less
conclusiv e. Studies using resistance-tr ained or competi tive athletes
were unable to duplicate the results seen in a recreational ly trained
population using similar supplementation schedules (160, 179).
Howev er, many of the studies investigating the effects of HMB on
strength and lean body mass in trained individuals were of short
duration (less than five weeks) and lacked the presence of a
periodiz ed, high-intensi ty training program. In order for HMB to be
effective, it may be essential to provide novel stimul i to individuals to
induce either muscle damage or stimulate elevated protein
breakdown. It appears that trained individuals instructed not to
change their programs do not benefi t from HMB. Investigations that
have provided an adequate training stimulus in trained individuals
have also reported increases in maximal strength and lean body
mass as compar ed to placebo tr eatments (158, 164).
705
Adverse Effects
The duration, dosage, and timing of HMB supplementation have
notably varied in the scienti fic literature. In nearly every published
investigation related to HMB supplementation, 3 to 6 grams per day
was ingested. Three grams per day (often divided into several
doses) is the most common dosage used in published studies. The
majori ty of studies investigat ing HMB have used the calcium salt of
HMB—HMB -Ca. Another form of HMB, HMB-free acid, has been
investigated as well (192). The safety of HMB supplementation has
been widely studied, and currently, the consensus is that HMB
presents no known adv erse ef fects.
β-Hydroxy- β-methylbutyrate is most effective when an
adequate training stimulus is provided. For untrained
individuals, this does not likely require high-vo lume
training. For trained individuals, a high-intensity, high-
volume resistance training program is likely neede d for
benefits to be realized with HMB supplementation.
Nutritional Muscle Buffers
During high-intensi ty anaer obic exercise, a significant accumulation
of hydrogen ions (H+) is coupled with a reducti on of pH within
skeletal muscle and has been shown to adversely affect performance
(182). The ability to regulate H+ concentration in skeletal muscle
during high-intensi ty exercise has been termed muscle buffe ring
capacity (MBC) . There is a strong positive relationship between
MBC and exercise performance (repeated-sprint ability, high-intensi ty
exercise capaci ty, anaer obic threshold, and training volume) (62). In
fact, resear chers have demon strated a positive relationsh ip between
exercise performance and MBC in athletes who participate in sports
such as basketball, soccer, hockey, cycling, crew (rowing), triathlons,
and sprinting (62). In theory , improving MBC by training or
nutritional means (β-alanine, sodium bicarbonate, or citrate) would
706
improve performance in sports and activities that may be limited by
H+ buildup. Therefore, a brief review of β-alanine, sodium
bicarbonate, and sodium citrate and their effects on high-intensi ty
exercise perf ormance f ollows.
β-Alanine
β-Alanine is a nonessential amino acid that is common in many foods
that we eat, such as chicken. By itself, β-alanine has limited
ergogenic properties. Howev er, in muscle cells, it is the rate-limiting
substr ate for carnosine synthesis (59). Harris and colleagues (104)
reported that four weeks of supplementing with β-alanine (4-6
g/day) resulted in a mean increase of 64% in skeletal muscle β-
alanine concentr ations. In humans, carnosine is found primari ly in
fast-twitch (type II) skeletal muscle and is estimated to contribute
up to 40% of the skeletal MBC of H+ produced during intense
anaer obic exercise, thus encour aging a drop in pH (104, 109).
Theor etically, increasing skeletal muscle carnosine levels through
chronic training or β-alanine supplementation (or both) would
improve MBC and most likely improve anaer obic performance.
Interestingly , carnosine concentr ations in athletes such as sprinters
and bodybui lders appear to be significantly higher than those in
marathoners, untr ained individuals, and older people (104 , 202).
Suzuki and colleagues (202)  examined the relationship between
skeletal muscle carnosine levels and high-intensi ty exercise
performance in trained cyclists. The authors reported a significant
and positive relationship between carnosine concentr ation and mean
power in a 30-second maximal sprint on a cycle ergometer . This
finding supported the theory that skeletal muscle carnosine levels
have a positive correlation with anaer obic performance because of
the relationship between carnosine and MB C.
Efficacy
β-Alanine has been studied for its effects on strength, aerobic power ,
and high-intensi ty short-term exercises interspersed with short
recovery interv als. In contrast to creatine, β-alanine does not seem
707
to improve maximal strength (127). Similarly, aerobic power does
not appear to be improved with β-alanine supplementation (127).
Even though aerobic power is not improved, supporting data indicate
that anaerobic threshold is improved with β-alanine supplementation
(226). Practical ly, improving anaer obic threshold (as measured by
the lactate and ventilatory thresholds) means that endur ance
activities can be performed at relatively higher intensi ties for longer
periods. Hill and colleagues (109) examined the effect of β-alanine
supplementation on muscle carnosine levels and exercise
performance in untrained subjects. In a double-bl ind fashion, 25
male subjects (19-31 yr) supplemented with either 4.0 grams β-
alanine or sugar placebo for the first week, then with up to 6.4
grams for an additional nine weeks. Muscle carnosine levels (via
muscle biopsy) and total work done (kilojoules) were measur ed at
weeks 0, 4, and 10 during cycling to exhaustion at maximal power
establ ished from a graded exercise cycle ergometry test. Mean
carnosine levels increased by 58% at week 4 and an additional 15%
at week 10. Additional ly, 13% and 16% increases in total work done
during cy cle er gometry wer e seen at weeks 4 and 10, r espectiv ely.
In a compr ehensiv e review summarizing the effects of β-alanine
supplementation on high-intensi ty performance, Artioli and
colleagues (9) stated that β-alanine ingest ion is capable of improving
performance in exercises resulting in an extreme intramuscular
acidotic environment, such as multiple bouts of high-intensi ty
exercises lasting more than 60 seconds, as well as single bouts
undertak en when fatigue is already present. High-intensi ty exercises
performed with a lower level of acidosis are unlikely to benefi t from
β-alanine supplementation.
Adverse Effects
In the published literature, β-alanine ingestion has ranged  from 2.4
to 6.4 grams per day. In many β-alanine trials, the total daily
amount of β-alanine ingest ion was divided into two to four smaller
doses. The reason for the smaller dosing strategies is to prevent the
only reported adverse effect of β-alanine supplementation, which is
708
the symptom of paresthesia (tingling, pricking, or numbness of a
person’ s skin) (9). Symptoms  of paresthesia are trigger ed by a high
and acute single dose and disappear within approximat ely 1 hour
after the ingestion (9, 104).
Sodium Bicarbonate
Sodium bicarbonate is an antacid (alkal inizing agent), meaning that
it counteracts or neutralizes acid (low pH). Sodium bicarbonate is
naturally formed in the body and is also found in baking soda.
Supplementation with sodium bicarbonate has been shown to
increase the pH of blood (198). A pH difference is created between
the inside and outside of muscle cells that causes an accelerated
movement of H+ out of the contracting muscle, helping to regulate
intramuscular pH. Supplemen ting with sodium bicarbonate has been
shown to improve MBC and in turn high-intensi ty exercise
performance.
Efficacy
Most resear ch investigating the efficacy of sodium bicarbonate for
enhancing sport performance has focused on short bouts of high-
intensi ty exercise lasting 60 seconds to 6 minutes (150).
McNaughton and colleagues  (148) have demonstr ated improved
short-term, high-intensi ty work from acute sodium bicarbonate
supplementation. Hobson and colleagues (111) examined the effects
of sodium bicarbonate ingestion during a 2,000-meter (2,187 yd)
rowing ergome ter time trial in experienced male rowers. The rowers
were supplemented before exercise with 0.3 grams per kilogram
body mass of sodium bicarb onate or a placebo . Time to complete
the 2,000 meters and time taken for each 500-meter (547 yd) split
were recorded. While there were no significant differences in the
overall 2,000-m eter time trial, the sodium bicarbonate did result in
significant improvements in the third and final 500-meter time splits.
Some investigations (26, 140), but not all (10), have reported similar
improvements in high-intensi ty exercise following 0.3 grams per
kilogram body mass sodium bicarbonate supplementation. The
709
timing of the sodium bicarbonate ingestion used in many scienti fic
investigations is typical ly 60 to 90 minutes before the bout of
exercise.
Adverse Effects
It appears that a dosage of 0.3 grams per kilogram body mass (136
mg/lb body mass) sodium bicarbonate ingested approximately 60 to
180 minutes before activity improves short-duration, high-intensi ty
exercise performance (97, 111, 150). Dosages above this amount
have been associated with unpleasant side effects such as diarrhea,
cramping, nausea, and vomiting. A more tolerable dose (0.2 g/kg
[91 mg/lb] body weight) has been shown to reduce these side
effects; howev er, resear ch has revealed that this dose does not
improve exercise performance (139). It appears that a sodium
bicarbonate dose ranging from 0.3 to 0.5 grams per kilogram body
mass, 60 to 180 minutes before exercise, is optimal for improvement
of performance  (97). Due to the severity of the side effects (which
may be experienced by some athletes even when ingesting 0.3 g/kg
body mass), many sport scientists recommend that athletes try
sodium bicarbonate supplementation during practice before using it
as a pr ecompeti tion aid.
Sodium Citrate
Although sodium citrate is not actual ly a base, it can increase blood
pH without the gastrointestin al distress that is commonly seen with
sodium bicarbonate supplementation (211). It is believed that once
in the blood, sodium citrate actual ly breaks down into bicarbonate,
thus increasing the extracellular pH. As a result, sodium citrate
would help regulate intramus cular pH during high-intensi ty exercise
by the same mechanism as sodium bicarbonate.
Efficacy
The data are equiv ocal in terms of the effectiveness of sodium
citrate’s ergogenic potential during short-duration, high-intensi ty
exercise, with some investigations reporting no benefi t (13, 211) and
710
others having observ ed an ergogenic effect (141, 149). For example,
a dose of 200 milligrams per pound body mass (0.44 g/kg body
weight) given 60 to 90 minutes before exercise led to significant
improvement (about 20% greater) in leg muscular endur ance during
maximal isometric knee extensions (105). Howev er, more resear ch is
needed before sodium citrate can be recommended before a
workout or competi tion for perf ormance enhancement.
Adverse Effects
Sodium citrate may possess MBC and has been used without the
typical gastrointestinal discomfort usually associated with sodium
bicarbonate ingestion (13, 141). Even though it appear s that the
adverse effects of sodium citrate supplementation are lower than
those of sodium bicarbonat e, ingestion of 0.4 to 0.6 grams per
kilogram body mass sodium  citrate has the potential to cause
gastrointestinal distress (161). The gastrointestinal response seems
to vary between individuals; therefore, athletes should individual ly
test sodium ci trate supplementation bef ore using i t in competi tion.
L-Carnitine
L-carni tine is synthesiz ed from the amino acids lysine and
methionine and is responsible for the transport of fatty acids from
the cytosol into the mitochondria to be oxidized for energy.
Carnitine’s role in lipid oxidation has gener ated interest in its efficacy
as a dietary supplement , primari ly to enhance exercise performance
by increasing fat use and sparing muscle glycogen. Howev er, studies
examining L-carnitine’s role as an ergogenic aid for increasing lipid
oxidation and subsequently enhancing performance are inconsistent
(85). Although Bacurau and colleagues (11) showed enhanced fatty
acid oxidation following three weeks of L-carni tine supple mentation,
which was attributed to a greater carnitine content in the muscle,
most studies have been unable to demonstr ate elevated muscle
carnitine levels following supplementation (218). This may be related
to limits in the amount of carnitine that can be absorbe d through
oral supplementation, or potentially related to limits in the amount of
711
fat that can be transporte d into the mitochondria through the
carnitine system due to feedback regulators within the muscle, such
as malon yl–coenzyme A, which is a pr oduct of metabol ism.
Efficacy
Interestingly , several studies  have suggested that L-carni tine may
enhance recovery from exercise (119, 216). Decreases in pain and
muscle damage (84), decreases in markers of metabol ic stress
(195), and enhanced recovery (216) have also been demonstr ated
following high-intensi ty resistance exercise in untrained or
recreational ly trained individu als who supplemented with L-carni tine.
The mechanisms that have been proposed involve enhancing blood
flow regulation through an enhanced vasodilatory effect that reduces
the magnitude of exercise-induced hypoxia (120). In addition,
Kraemer and colleagues indicated that L-carni tine supplementation
(2 g/day for three weeks) upregulates androgen receptors (132) and
increases IGF binding proteins that preserv e IGF-1 concentr ations
(133). These endocrine adaptations from the supplement may have
an important role in the enhanced recovery seen following high-
intensi ty exercise.
Adverse Effects
Up to 3 grams of daily L-carnitine supplementation (for three weeks)
appears to be well tolerated in healthy volunteers, with no adverse
subjectiv e, hematological, or metabol ic events reported (183).
Howev er, as with most supplements, this information should not be
extrapolated to suggest the safety of greater dosing or of use for
prolonged supplementation periods.
Creatine
Creatine  is a nitrogenous organic compound that is synthesiz ed
naturally in the body, prima rily in the liver, and helps to supply
energy to all cells in the body. It can also be synthesiz ed in smaller
amounts in both the kidneys and pancr eas. The amino acids
712
arginine, glycine, and methionine are the precursors for the
synthesis of creatine in those organs. Creatine can also be obtained
through dietary sources. It is found in relative abundance in both
meat and fish. Approximate ly 98% of creatine is stored within
skeletal muscle  in either its free form (40%) or its phosphorylated
form (60%). Smaller amoun ts of creatine are also stored in the
heart, brain, and testes. Creatine is transported from its site of
synthesis to the sk eletal muscle via cir culation.
Importance of Creatine to Exercise
Creatine, in the form of creatine phosphate (CP; also called
phosphocr eatine [PCr]), has an essential role in energy metabol ism
as a substr ate for the formation of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) by
rephosphorylating adenosine diphosphate (ADP), especial ly during
short-duration, high-intensi ty exercise. The ability to rapidly
rephosphorylate ADP is dependent on the enzyme creatine kinase
and the availability of CP within the muscle. As CP stores become
depleted, the ability to perform high-intensi ty exercise declines. In
short-duration sprints (e.g., a 100 m sprint), the energy for fueling
the activity is derived primari ly through the hydrolysis of CP.
Howev er, as high-intensi ty exercise increases in duration, the ability
of CP to serv e as an ener gy sour ce is dr astical ly reduced.
Depletion of muscle CP during high-intensi ty exercise is the
primary mecha nism leading to fatigue in such events. During a 6-
second bout of maximal exercise, CP levels within the muscle are
reduced 35% to 57% from resting levels (81). As the duration of
high-intensi ty exercise increases to 30 seconds, CP levels in the
muscle are further reduced by approximately 64% to 80% from
resting levels (28, 40); during bouts of repeated high-intensi ty
exercise, CP levels in the muscle are almost completely depleted
(147). As muscle CP concentr ations decrease, the ability to perform
maximal exercise is reduced. Hirvonen and colleagues (110)
demonstr ated that sprint times were slower as CP concentr ations
were reduced. It stands to reason that if muscle CP concentr ations
713
could be maintained, the ability to sustain high-intensi ty exercise
would be improved. This is the basis for creatine supplementation in
athletes.
Creatine Supplementation
Survey-based studies suggest that the prevalence of creatine use
among athletes and military personnel is about 15% to 40%, with
use more common in male strength or power athletes (134). As a
result of their widespr ead use, creatine supplements may be the
most extensiv ely studied ergogenic aid in recent history . Creatine
supplementation is reported to increase the creatine content of
muscles by approximately 20% (65, 121). Howev er, it appears that a
saturation limit for creatine exists within muscle. Once creatine
concentr ations in skeletal muscle reach 150 to 160 mmol per
kilogram dry weight, additional supplementation appears to be
unable to further increase muscle creatine concentr ations (92). This
has important implications for the “more is better” philosoph y that
governs the thinking of some athletes and may affect the
development of pr oper and r ealistic dosing str ategies.
A typical creatine supplementation regimen involves a loading
dose of 20 to 25 grams daily for five days, or 0.3 grams per kilogram
body mass if an individual wishes to dose relative to body weight,
followed by a maintenance dose of 2 grams per day (121). If one
ingests creatine without an initial loading dose, muscle creatine
content will reach levels similar to those seen in people who do
initially use a loading dose, but reaching that muscle creatine
concentr ation will take longer (~30 days vs. 5 days). Muscle creatine
levels will remain elevated as long as the maintenance dose is
maintained (2 g/day or 0.03 g/kg body mass per day) (121). Once
creatine supplementation is stopped, muscle creatine levels will
return to basel ine lev els in appr oximately f our weeks (65, 121).
While most of the available resear ch involving creatine
supplementation has focused on skeletal muscle, a small body of
accumulating resear ch has focused on creatine and potential
714
cogni tive benefits. Creatine  supplementation can increase brain
creatine conten t in humans, but higher and more prolonged dosing
strategies than those typical ly used to increase muscle creatine
levels are required to increase brain creatine (57). At this time, the
optimal dosing strategies needed to induce this response are
currently unknown, but this is an active area of resear ch. It appears
that creatine is most likely to exert an influence in situations where
cogni tive processes are stressed (e.g., during sleep depriv ation,
experimental hypoxia, and cogni tively demanding tasks).
Furthermor e, creatine has shown some promise for attenuating
symptoms of concussion, mild traumatic brain injury , and depression
(72).
Efficacy
Most studies examining the effect of creatine supplementation on
strength performance have been fairly consistent in showing
significant ergogenic benefi ts (figure 12.5) (217). Strength increases
in the bench press, squat, and power clean may be two to three
times higher in trained athletes supplementing with creatine
compar ed to placebo (113). These results may highlight the benefi t
of creatine supplementatio n in experienced resistan ce-trained
athletes whose potential to improve strength may be limited. In
experienced strength athletes , supplementing with creatine may also
enhance the quality of workouts (less fatigue, enhanced recovery),
which may be crucial for providing a greater training stimulus to the
muscle.
715
FIGURE 12.5 Appr oximate changes in performance variables following creatine
supplementation.
Data from Wax et al. (2021).
Creatine supplementation has been shown to increase
maximal strength, power, and lean body mass in both
trained and untrained populations. Additionally, creatine
supplementation is safe and relatively inexpensive.
Most studies examining the effects of creatine supplementation on
a single bout of explosiv e exercise (sprint performance)  have not
shown any significant performance improvements (129, 155).
Howev er, in many of these studies, subjects were supplemented with
a loading dose for only five days (129, 155). While ingesting creatine
with a loading dose for five days will significantly increase
intramuscular creatine stores, this is likely not enough  time for
training adaptations to occur and to be manifested in explosiv e
exercise performance improvements. When subjects have
supplemented for an extended period of time (28-84 days),
significant improvements in jump and power performance have been
716
seen (215). It appears that creatine is more effective as a training
supplement than as a dir ect perf ormance enhancer .
Body Mass Changes
Prolonged creatine suppleme ntation has been gener ally associated
with increases in body weight. These increases appear to primari ly
relate to increases in fat-free mass. The increase in body mass is
believed to be partly related to an increase in total body water. The
water retention phenomenon occurs in the early stages (first several
days) of supplementation (102). An increase in creatine content
within the muscle is thought to enhance the intracellular osmotic
gradient, causing water to fill the cell (8). In gener al, creatine
supplementation during training is typical ly associated with a 1- to 4-
pound (0.5-1.8 kg) greater increase in body mass or fat-free mass
(71) o ver a period of sev eral weeks to sev eral months.
Adverse Effects
Increase in body mass could be a potential unwanted side effect of
creatine supple mentation, particularly in relation to strength-to-mass
or power -to-m ass ratio. Howev er, in athletes suppleme nting with
creatine, weigh t gain is often a desired outcome. When people talk
about side effects from a drug or supplement, they are gener ally
referring to a potential ly debilitating effect. There have been many
anecdotal reports of gastrointestinal, cardiovascular , and muscular
problems, including muscle cramps, in association with creatine
ingestion. Howev er, controlled studies have been unable to
document any significant side effects from creatine supple mentation.
Even during prolonged supplementation (several weeks up to many
months), no increases in reported side effects were noted in subjects
supplementing with creatine—ei ther competi tive athletes or
recreational ly trained individuals (8).
Another concern with any supplement is the long-term health
effects. A retrospectiv e study on health variables in 26 former or
current compe titive athletes who had used creatine for up to four
717
years indicated only occasional gastrointestinal upset during the
loading phase (185). These disturbances ranged from gas to mild
diarrhea. Other hypothesiz ed major concerns during creatine
supplementation include a strain on the kidneys due to the high
nitrogen content of creatine and increased creatine excretion during
short-term ingestion. Howev er, no renal dysfunction has been
reported with either short-term (five days) or long-term (up to five
years) cr eatine use (170, 171).
Despite certain media and anecdotal reports linking
creatine supplementation to dehydration and cramping,
there is no reason to believe that creatine enhances the
risk for these side effects.
Stimulants
There is little question about the usefulness of stimulants to many
types of athletic endea vors; the effects of stimulants include reduced
fatigue, increased alertness, increased confidence, and even
euphoria. Because stimulants have to be used at the time of
competi tion to confer an ergogenic advantage, drug testing
performed immediately after the competi tion can effectively reduce
their abuse (118). Howev er, many stimulants (e.g., caffeine) are also
available in food items, while others (e.g., ephedrine) may be found
in decongestants and other medications.
Caffeine
Caffeine  is a multifaceted supplem ent used in athletics and is
popular amon g both aerobic endur ance and resistance training
athletes. It is found in coffee, tea, soft drinks, chocolate, and various
other foods. It is a central nervous system stimulant, and its effects
are similar to, yet weaker than, those associated with
amphetamines. Caffeine has been used as a performance enhancer
for more than 40 years and is one of the few ergogenic aids that
may be used compar ably b y aerobic and anaer obic athletes.
718
The mechanism to explain endur ance improvements is unclear .
One of the mechanisms that has been proposed involves an increase
in fat oxidation through the mobilization of free fatty acids from
adipose tissue or intramuscu lar fat stores (90). The greater use of
fat as a primar y energy source slows glycogen depletion and delays
fatigue. Alterations in muscle metabol ism alone cannot fully explain
the ergogenic effect of caffeine. During short-duration, high-intensi ty
exercise, the primary ergogenic effect attributed to caffeine
supplementation is enhanced power production. This is thought to
be the result of an enhanced excitation–contr action  coupl ing,
affecting neuromuscular transmission and mobilization of
intracellular calcium ions f rom the sar coplasmic r eticulum (90).
Efficacy
For the aerobic athlete, caffeine is thought to prolong aerobic
endur ance exercise (221). Initial studies dealing with the effect of
caffeine supplementation on aerobic endur ance performance
indicated a 21-minute improvement in the time to exhaustion (from
75 min in a placebo trial to 96 min in the caffeine trial) during
cycling at 80% of V̇O2max (49). These results were confirmed by
other investigations demonstr ating the ergogenic effect of caffeine
during prolong ed aerobic endur ance activity (17). These studies
showed that caffeine in doses ranging from 3 to 9 milligrams per
kilogram (equivalent to approximately 1.5 to 3.5 cups of automatic
drip coffee in a 70 kg [154 lb] person) produced a significant
ergogenic effect. Similar performance effects from caffeine have also
been demonst rated during short-duration, high-intensi ty exercise
(34, 58).
When the effects of caffeine ingestion on sprint or power
performance are examined, howev er, the ergogenic benefi ts become
less clear. Several studies have shown that caffeine ingestion does
not improve power performance (46, 96), but those studies used
recreational athletes. In elite judo athletes ingesting caffeine (5
mg/kg), it was reported that peak power was significantly improved
in comparison wi th a placebo tr eatment (194).
719
Similarly, in competi tive swimmers, caffeine ingestion (250 mg)
was shown to improve sprint  times during repeated 100-meter (109
yd) sprints by an average of 3% (47). The number of studies on
caffeine ingestion and sprint and power performance is limited
compar ed to the number that measur ed caffeine’s effect on aerobic
endur ance performance. Thus, the results of the studies on the
ergogenic benefit of caffeine for power performance are
inconclusiv e. If any performance benefi t occurs, it is likely in the
trained athlete.
Caffeine from a food source (coffee consumption) and anhydrous
caffeine have both shown significant performance effects; howev er,
the extent of performance improvements appears to be greater
when caffeine is ingested in tablet form (91). When caffeine is
provided as a pure caffeine supplement, the ergogenic benefi t with
respect to improved aerobic endur ance performance has been
reported to range between 28% and 43% (91). Howev er, when it is
provided in a food source such as coffee (either caffeinate d coffee or
decaf feinated coffee with added caffeine), the ergogenic benefi t for
aerobic endur ance exercise may not be seen (91). Graham and
colleagues (91) suggested that although the bioavailability of
caffeine is the same whether it is consumed in a food source or in an
anhydrous form, some compound in coffee antagoniz es the action of
caffeine.
In doses of 3 to 9 milligrams per kilogram body weight
consumed approximately 60 minutes before exercise or
during prolo nged exerci se, caffeine is ergogeni c. No
further benefit is observed when it is consumed at
higher dosages (≥9 mg/kg). It can decrease feelings of
perceived exertion, impro ve work capacity, and increase
mental alertness. The scientific literature does not
support caffeine-induced diuresis during exercise or any
harmful change in fluid balance that would nega tively
affect performance.
720