# Section 12.4

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 12: Performance-Enhancing Substances and Methods

**Section:** 12.4 -- Conclusion

**PDF Pages:** 721--728

Adverse Effects
The side effects associated with caffeine include anxiet y,
gastrointestinal disturbances , restlessness, insomnia, tremors, and
heart arrhythmias. Caffeine is also physical ly addicting, and
discontinuation can result in some withdrawal symptoms, such as
headache, fatigue, dysphoric mood, difficulty concentr ating, and flu-
like somatic symptoms (200). Caffeine intakes greater than 9
milligrams per kilogram appear to result in a greater risk for side
effects (99). Caffeine overdose is an issue that can have potential ly
fatal consequences. A lethal dose of caffeine is typical ly in excess of
5 grams, which equates to about 42 cups of coffee at 120 milligrams
of caffeine per cup (128) or twent y-five 200-mi lligram tablets of
caffeine.
Preworkout Energy Drinks
Energy drinks were initially introduced to the market in the United
States in the 1990s and have since become one of the biggest
selling functional beverages in the industry with annual sales
projected to surpass $21 billion by the year 2026 (123). The primary
reasons for ingesting energy drinks include enhancing workouts,
improving sport performance, and facilitating faster training
adaptations (168). The ingredients most common to commer cially
available energy drinks are caffeine, taurine, ginseng, guarana,
carboh ydrates, B vitamins, tyrosine, and ginkgo biloba, among
others. Of these ingredients, caffeine and carboh ydrate are the
primary er gogenic nutrients in ener gy drinks (123).
Efficacy
Prework out energy drinks have been investigated for their
effectiveness on several modes of exercise, including resistance
exercise, anaer obic exercise, and aerobic endur ance exercise. In
relation to resistance exercise performance, Forbes and colleagues
(70) gave 15 physical ly active college-aged students a commer cially
available energy drink or an isocaloric noncaf feinated placebo 60
minutes before exercise. The energy drink was standar dized with 2
721
milligrams of caffeine per kilogram body mass. The exercise bout
consisted of 3 sets of 70% 1RM bench press conducted to failure on
each set with 1 minute of rest between each set. The energy drink
significantly increased bench press performance as compar ed to the
placebo treatment. Other studies investigating the effects of
prework out energy drink consumption have also reported
improvements in upper and lower body total lifting volume (54, 86).
While it appea rs that prework out energy drink ingestion is effective
for increasing resistance training volume performance, other types of
anaer obic exercise (including Wingate tests and speed or agility
performance) are not as responsiv e to energy drink consumption
(70, 114). In terms of aerobic endur ance exercise performance,
some investiga tions (122), but not all (36), have reported that
energy drinks containing approximately 2 milligrams of caffeine per
kilogram body mass, consumed within an hour before exercise,
improve cycling and running performance in trained cyclists and
recreational ly active individu als (123). Interestingly , the amount of
caffeine (2 mg/kg body mass) in the energy drinks is less than the
amount recom mended for an enhancement of exercise performance
(3-9 mg/kg body mass). This contributes to the hypothesis that the
syner gistic effects of the various ingredients in energy drinks may be
responsible for the reported improvements in exercise performance
(123).
Adverse Effects
The safety issues surroundi ng energy drink consumpti on appear
related to excessiv e caffeine intake (187) and the detrime ntal effects
of mixing energy drinks with alcohol (187). The mixing of energy
drinks with alcohol is more prevalent in certain social contexts and is
not a common  practice for those consuming energy drinks before a
workout to enhance work capaci ty or to facilitate faster training
adaptations. Due to the presence of caffeine in most energy drinks,
the same potential adverse effects that exist for caffeine also exist
for energy drinks. Howev er, most energy drinks contain only
moder ate amounts of caffeine, typical ly less than 300 milligrams
722
(187). Even though energy drinks typical ly contain low to moder ate
doses of caffeine, one should recogniz e that it is possible to
overdose on caffeine through the consumption of energy drinks
(116). While there is some information related to the side effects of
excess caffeine ingestion, energy drinks contain other ingredients
and stimulants . Currently, it is unknown whether inclusion of other
stimulants in energy drinks may increase or decrease the threshold
for experiencing side effects. Therefore, more resear ch is needed to
determine the long-term effects of habitual intake of energy drinks
before defini tive conclusions can be dr awn.
Ephedrine
Another stimulant, ephedrine, has been widely used throughout the
world for temporary relief from the symptoms of bronchial asthma,
bronchi tis, allergies, shortnes s of breath, cold and flu symptoms, and
other ailments. Ephedrine is also very popular among bodybui lders
due to its strong thermogenic quality. A thermogenic supplement or
drug works by elevating basal metabol ic rate, thereby increasing
energy expendi ture and ultimately resulting in fat loss. It often is
used as a stacking agent with caffeine to enhance the thermogenic
effect.
Efficacy
Studies examining the ergogenic effect of ephedrine have shown it
to be effective only when it is taken in combination with caffeine
(21). These results have been quite consistent with regard to
improving aerobic endur ance performance (20). In terms of
anaer obic exercise performan ce, the scienti fic literature investigating
the combination of ephedrine and caffeine is equiv ocal (224).
Howev er, side effects (vomiting and nausea) following exercise have
been reported in 25% of the subjects ingesting a mixture of 5
milligrams per kilogram caffeine and 1 milligram per kilogram
ephedrine (19). A subsequent study performed by the same
investigators showed that at a lower dose (4 mg/kg caffeine and 0.8
723
mg/kg ephedrine), similar ergogenic benefi ts were realized with no
side ef fects (20).
Adverse Effects
Ephedr a, also called ma huang , is a plant that contains ephedrine. In
the United States before 2004, most over-the-counter sport and
weight -loss products contained ephedr a. Howev er, in April 2004, the
FDA banned all products containing ephedr a after determi ning that it
posed an unreasonable risk to those who used it. The FDA ban was
based on a report published by the Rand Institute (188) indicating
that 16,000 adverse events were linked to the use of ephedr a-
containing dietary supplements. Further , Shekelle and colleagues
(188) reported that the use of ephedr a-containing dietary
supplements or ephedrine plus caffeine was associated with an
increased incidence of nausea, vomiting, psychiatric symptoms such
as anxiet y and change in mood, autonomic hyperactivity,
palpitations, and, in a few cases, death. As a result of the many
adverse effects, ephedrine use has been banned by most sport
governing bodies, including the I nternational Olympic Commi ttee.
Citrus Aurantium
Citrus aurantium is from a fruit commonly known as bitter orange
and is often used as an Asian herbal medicine to treat digestiv e
problems (80, 100). Howev er, it is also a mild stimulant and is
thought to contribute to appeti te suppr ession and increased
metabol ic rate and l ipolysis (80, 100).
Efficacy
When citrus aurantium is combined with caffeine and other herbal
products, significant improvements in time to fatigue have been
reported (199). Citrus aurantium contains synephrine, a
sympathomimetic agent, which some have suggested stimulates
specific beta adrenergic receptors (β-3, but not β-1 or β-2) that in
turn stimulate fat metabol ism without any of the negativ e side
effects gener ally associated with compounds that stimulate the other
724
adrenergic receptors (38). Synephrine, a known active component of
citrus aurantium, is thought to interact with β-3 receptors to increase
lipolysis (i.e., the breakdown of body fat) and minimiz e the
cardiovascular effect typical of adrenergic amines (38). Currently, not
enough data on citrus aurantium alone have been published to
recommend i ts use as a perf ormance-enhancing supplement.
Adverse Effects
Synephrine has been shown to stimulate peripher al α-1 receptors,
resulting in vasoconstriction and elevations in blood pressure (31).
Howev er, other resear ch has shown that when citrus aurantium is
ingested alone, no effect on blood pressure is seen (103), but in
combination with other herbal products it may cause significant
elevations in systol ic blood pressure (103). It should be noted that
synephrine is currently on the National Collegiat e Athletic
Association’ s banned l ist of perf ormance-enhancing drugs.
Summary of Ergogenic and Non-Ergogenic
Dietary Supplements and Their Application
Essential amino acids and branched-chain amino acids . Ability to
stimulate muscle protein synthesis, particularly via the anabol ic effects of the
amino acid leucine
Arginine . Not effective for inducing nitric oxide or muscle blood flow in
healthy individuals;  also does not appear to have any effect on improving
endur ance perf ormance in heal thy populations
β-Hydroxy- β-methylbutyrate (HMB) . Most effective for trained
individuals participating in a high-intensi ty, high-volume resistance training
program
β-Alanine . Effective as a performance-enhancing substance in exercises
inducing a high level of lactic acid, such as multiple bouts of high-intensi ty
exercises lasting mor e than 60 seconds
Sodium bicarbonate . Has been shown to improve high-intensi ty exercise
performance and training but is associated with unpleasant side effects
consistent with gastrointestinal discomf ort, which would likely decrease
performance
725
Sodium citrate . Inconclusiv e scienti fic data in relation to sodium citrate’s
ergogenic potential during short -duration, high-intensi ty exercise
L-carnitine . May enhance recovery following high-intensi ty resistance
exercise
Creatine . Effective for increasing maximal strength, power , lean body mass,
and sprint performance in both trained and untrained populations; no other
sport supplement is supported b y the same lev el of posi tive resear ch
Caffeine . Effective for prolonging aerobic endur ance exercise, but its effects
on sprint or power perf ormance ar e less clear
Preworkout energy drinks . Effective for increasing resistance training
volume performance and endur ance performance but not ergogenic in their
ability to improve anaer obic exercise (high-intensi ty cycling and speed or
agility perf ormance)
Ephedrine . When combined with caffeine, is able to improve aerobic
endur ance performance; not as effective in improving anaer obic exercise
performance
Citrus aurantium . When combined with caffeine and other herbal products,
improvements in exercise time to fatigue (a measur e of endur ance
performance) ha ve been r eported
726
Conclusion
Athletes are frequently exposed to information about ergogenic aids.
Strength and condi tioning professionals play an integr al part in the
decision-making process regarding which ergogenic aids athletes
choose to take. Therefore, it is imper ative that strength and
condi tioning professionals stay up to date on the latest scienti fic
findings on what ergogenic aids are safe, effective, and legal. If
strength and condi tioning professionals fail in this area, the athletes
they serve will be more susceptible to hyped marketing, potential ly
false advertising, and influen ce by others who may not have the
athlete’ s best interests in mind. The information contained in this
chapter serves the strength and condi tioning professional by
providing fundamental information on performance-enhancing
substances, including which substances are banned, effective or
nonef fective, and saf e.
KEY TERMS
acromegaly
anabol ic ster oid
androgenic
β-agonists
β-block ers
β-hydroxy-β-meth ylbutyrate (HMB)
branched-chain amino acids (B CAA)
caffeine
creatine
dietary supplement
ergogenic aid
ergolytic
erythr opoietin (EPO)
essential amino acids (EAA)
human chorionic gonadotr opin (HCG)
727
human gr owth hormone (HGH)
insulin
lipolysis
muscle buf fering capaci ty (MB C)
muscle dysmorphia
peptides
random drug tests
selectiv e andr ogen r eceptor modulators (S ARMs)
stacking
testoster one
thermogenesis
vasodilation
STUDY QUESTIONS
  1.  Which of the following hormones is responsible for enhancing
the abi lity to del iver oxygen to contr acting sk eletal muscle?
  a.  erythr opoietin
  b.  insul in
  c.  human gr owth hormone
  d.  testoster one
  2.  What are the effects of evening binge alcohol consumption on
sleep and autonomic f unction?
  a.  It impr oves sleep qual ity, increases car diac v agal tone, and
impairs blood pr essure regulation.
  b.  It has no signi ficant impact on sleep or autonomic
function.
  c.  It disrupts sleeping car diac v agal tone, r educes sleep
quality, increases sympathoex citation, and disrupts blood
pressure regulation.
  d.  It impr oves blood pr essure regulation and r educes
sympathoex citation during sleep .
  3.  What organization prohibits the use of SARMs in and outside
of competi tion for all athletes?
728