# Section 13.5

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 13: Principles of Test Selection and Administration

**Section:** 13.5 -- Test Administration

**PDF Pages:** 758--763

6. Fatiguing anaer obic capaci ty tests (e.g., 300-yard [274 m]
shuttle, 90 s bo x hop test)
7. Aerobic capaci ty tests (e.g., 1.5-mi le [2.4 km] run, 12-minute
run test, Yo-Yo intermi ttent recovery test, maximal aerobic
speed test, and 30-15 intermi ttent fi tness test)
The test order should also be designed to require minimal
recovery time between tests, allowing for a more efficient testing
session. An effort should be made to administer fatiguing anaer obic
capaci ty tests and aerobic tests on a different day than the other
tests. However, if performed on the same day, these tests should be
performed last, after an extended r est period.
It is important  that test sessions be conducted at the same time
of day to avoid fluctuation s in physiological response s due to
differences in circadian rhythm (33). It is also recommended that
tests be conducted indoors, which will allow for climate and testing
surfaces to r emain mor e consistent.
The order of tests should be designed in such a way that
the completion of one test does not adversely affect
performance in subsequent tests.
Preparing Athletes for Testing
The date, time, and purpose of a test battery should be announced
in advance to allow athletes to prepare physical ly and mental ly. To
maximiz e test reliability, athletes should be familiar with test content
and procedur es. Athletes should also be in a state of readiness  to
perform. Athlete readiness has been defined as “the state of being
fully prepared to train and perform physical ly and mental ly” (3). A
short, supervised pretest practice or familiarization session one to
three days before the test, in which the athletes exert themselv es at
somewhat less than full intensi ty, is often beneficial for athletes who
either have never participated  in the test before or have not done so
for a long time. One strategy to promote test familiarization among
758
athletes could be to incorp orate familiarization of the tests into
preceding training sessions, even if only as part of their dynamic
warm-up .
The instructions should cover the purpose of the test, how it is to
be performed, the amount of warm-up recommended, the number
of practice attempts allowed, the number of trials, test scoring,
criteria for disallowing attempts, and recommendations for
maximizing performance. The instructions that are given to the
athletes need to be clear and concise because this will increase the
reliability and objectivi ty of the test (25).
As an important supplement to reading test instructions aloud,
the test administr ator or a competent assistant should demonstr ate
proper test performance when possible. The athletes should be
given opportuni ties to ask questions before and after the
demonstr ation. The test administrator should anticipate questions
and have answers prepared. It is important to motiv ate all athletes
equal ly rather than giving special encour agement to only some.
Whenev er possible, tell athletes their test scores immediately after
each trial to motivate them to perform better on subsequent trials
(2).
Reliability of testing improves with pretest warm-up (2). An
appropriately organized warm-up consists of a gener al warm-up
followed by a specific warm-up. Both types of warm-ups include
body movements similar to those involved in the test. An organized,
instructor -led gener al warm-up ensur es uniformity. It is acceptable
to allow two or three activity-speci fic warm-up trials, depending on
the test protocol, and have subsequent trials actual ly count toward
the score. Depending on the test protocol, the score can be the best
or the a verage of the post -warm-up trials (2).
General and specific warm-ups performed before a test
can increase the test’s reliability.
759
Administer a supervised cool-down period to athletes following
tests that dramatical ly increase heart rate and at the completion of
the test battery. For exampl e, after the 300-yard (274 m) shuttle,
the athlete should not sit or lie down; active recovery using low-
intensi ty movement and light stretching will enhance the recovery
process (10).
760
Conclusion
Tests and measur ements can be used to assess athletic talent,
identi fy physical capaci ties in need of improvement, provide
reference values to evaluate the effectiveness of a training program,
and set realistic training goals. To optimiz e test quality, testers must
understand and consider validity and reliability. Test selection
involves consid eration of the physiological energy system s required
by the sport; movement specificity; and the athletes’ experience,
training status, age, and sex. Testers must also consider
environmental factors such as temper ature, humidi ty, and altitude
before adminis tering tests. Strength and condi tioning professionals
must always remain consciou s of potential health risks during testing
and attentiv e to signs and symptoms of possible health problems
that require medical referral. Testers must be carefully selected and
well trained, and the testin g session must be well planned and
organized using the appropriate testing sequence. Consistent and
effective preparation of athletes f or testing is essential.
KEY TERMS
concurr ent validity
construct v alidity
content v alidity
convergent v alidity
criterion v alidity
discriminant v alidity
evaluation
face validity
field test
formativ e evaluation
interr ater agr eement
interr ater r eliability
intraclass-corr elation coef ficient
761
intrarater v ariabi lity
intrasubject v ariabi lity
measur ement
midtest
monitoring
objectivi ty
posttest
predictiv e validity
pretest
readiness
reliability
talent identi fication
test
test bat tery
test–retest r eliability
typical err or of measur ement
validity
STUDY QUESTIONS
  1.  R egular assessment through evidence-based testing is
important for monitoring progress in athletes because of which
of the f ollowing r easons?
  a.  It ensur es the athlete maintains a consistent tr aining
routine.
  b.  It pr ovides subjectiv e feedback f rom the athlete about
their f eelings.
  c.  It al lows coaches to tr ack changes and mak e data-driv en
program modi fication.
  d.  It guar antees immediate impr ovement in athletic
performance.
  2.  R eliability is crucial in test selection because it ensur es that
the test does which of the f ollowing?
  a.  cr eates a chal lenge f or the athlete
762
  b.  produces consistent r esults over mul tiple trials
  c.  pr ovides a w ay to quickly administer the test
  d.  reduces the expense of the test
  3.  Which of the following tests is most appropriate for assessing
aerobic endur ance in a soc cer pla yer?
  a.  1RM bench pr ess
  b.  40-yard sprint
  c.  V̇O2max test
  d.  v ertical jump
  4.  When assessing the validity of a test, which aspect is the most
critical?
  a.  abi lity to be r epeated consistently
  b.  alignment wi th the sport -speci fic demands
  c.  af fordability and ease of implementation
  d.  capaci ty to ac commodate lar ge groups
  5.  To evaluate an athlete’ s lower body power , which of the
following tests would most accurately provide valid results for
this purpose?
  a.  T-test
  b.  vertical jump
  c.  40- yard sprint
  d.  1RM deadl ift
763