# Section 13.2

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 13: Principles of Test Selection and Administration

**Section:** 13.2 -- Testing Terminology

**PDF Pages:** 736--742

Evaluation of Test Quality
Test results are valuable only when two key criteria are met: validity
and reliability. Validity ensur es the test accurately measur es its
intended attribute, while reliability guarantees consistency in
measur ement across multiple instances. These fundamental
characteristics are essential in assessing the quality of a test and its
associated metrics. Both must meet acceptable standar ds for the
test to pr ovide meaningf ul benefi ts.
Validity
Validity  refers to the degree to which a test or test item measur es
what it is supposed to measur e and is one of the most important
characteristics of testing (2, 25). For tests of physical properties such
as heigh t and weight, validity is easy to establ ish. For example, close
correspondence between the readings on a spring scale and the
readings on a calibrated balance scale indicates validity of weighing
with the spring scale. The validity of tests of basic athletic abilities or
capaci ties is more difficult to establ ish. There are several types of
validity, including construct validity, face validity, content validity, and
criterion v alidity.
To be valid, physical performance tests should measure
abilities important in the sport, produce repeatable
results (see the later section on reliability), measure the
performance of one athlete at a time (unless otherwise
specified in the protocol), appear meaningful, be of
suitable difficulty, be able to differentiate between
various levels of ability, permit accurate scoring, include
a sufficient number of trials, and withstand the test of
statistical evaluation. Given the choice between  two
valid tests, consideration should be given to simplicity
and economy of test administration.
736
Construct Validity
Construct validity  is the ability of a test to represent the
underlying construct (the theory developed to organize and explain
some aspects of existing knowledge and observ ations). Construct
validity refers to overall validity, or the extent to which the test
actual ly measu res what it was designed to measur e (24). Face
validity, content validity, and criterion validity, defined next, are
secondary to and provide evidence for construct validity. Within
construct validity, there are two important subtypes: convergent
validity  and discriminant validity . Both are crucial in the
development and evaluation of measur ement tools. Convergent
validity is evidenced by high positive correlations between  results of
the test being assessed and those of the recogniz ed measure of the
construct (the “gold standar d”). A test may be preferable to the gold
standar d if it exhibi ts convergent validity with the standar d but is
less demanding in terms of time, equipment, expense, or expertise.
Convergent validity would be demonstr ated if scores on the 1RM
back squat test and the isometric squat test (requiring force plate
technology) are highly correlated, indicating that both tests are
effectively measuring the same underlying construct (lower body
strength).
Discriminant validity is the ability of a test to distinguish between
two different constructs and is evidenced by a low correlation
between the results of the test and those of tests of a different
construct (2). Discriminant validity would be establ ished if scores on
the 1RM back squat test do not show a correlation with V̇O2max
scores, indicating that the squat test is specifically measuring
strength and not endur ance (two di fferent constructs).
Face Validity
Face validity  is the appear ance to the athlete and other casual
observ ers that the test measur es what it is purported to measur e. If
a test or test item has face validity, the athlete is more likely to
respond to it positively (1). The assessment of face validity is
737
gener ally informal and nonquanti tative. In other fields, such as
psychology , tests may be deliberately constructed to have poor face
validity because if examinee s realize what a test or test item is
supposed to measur e, they can answer deceptiv ely to manipulate
their scores. For tests of basic athletic abilities, howev er, face validity
is desirable based on the assumption that anyone taking a test of
physical ability wants to do well and is thus motiv ated by a test that
appears to measur e a relevant capabi lity.
Content Validity
Content validity  is the assessment by experts that the testing
covers all relevant subtopics or component abilities in appropriate
proportions (1). For athletic testing, these include all the component
abilities needed for a particular sport or sport position. Examples of
component abilities in athletics are jumping ability, sprinting ability,
and lower body strength (37). For example, a test battery for
potential soccer players should include, at minimum, tests of
sprinting speed, agility, aerobic endur ance, and kicking power . To
ensur e content validity, the test developer should list the ability
components to be assessed and make sure they are all represented
on the test. In addition, the proportion of the total score attributable
to a particula r component ability should be proportio nal to the
importance of that componen t to total performance. While the terms
face validity and content validity are sometimes used
interchangeably , the latter relates to actual validity while the former
relates to the appear ance of v alidity to nonexperts (1).
Criterion Validity
Criterion validity  is the extent to which test scores are associated
with some other measur e of the same ability. There are two types of
criterion v alidity: concurr ent and pr edictiv e.
Concurrent validity  is the extent to which test scores are
associated with those of other accepted tests that measur e the same
ability. Criterion validity is often estimated statistical ly. For example,
738
a Pearson product –moment correlation coefficient based on the
scores on a new body fat assessment device and those from dual-
energy X-ray absorptiometry would provide a measur e of the
concurr ent validity of the new test.
Predictive validity  is the extent to which the test score
corresponds with future behavior or performance. This can be
measur ed through comparison of a test score with some measur e of
success in the sport itself. For example, one could calculate the
statistical correlation between the overall score on a battery of tests
used to assess potential for basketball and a measur emen t of actual
basketball performance as indicated by a composi te of such
quanti ties as points scored, rebounds, assists, blocked shots, forced
turno vers, and steals.
Reliability
Reliability  is a measur e of the degree of consistency or
repeatabi lity of a test (2, 8). If an athlete whose ability does not
change is measur ed two times and achiev es the same score, the test
is perfectly reliable. With an unreliable test, an individual could
obtain a high score on one day and a low score on another . A test
must be reliable to be valid, because highly variable results have
little meaning.  Howev er, even a reliable test may not be valid,
because the test may not measure what it is supposed to measur e.
For example, both the 60-meter (66 yard) sprint and the 1.5-mi le
(2.4 km) run are reliable field tests, but only the 1.5-mi le run is
consider ed a valid field test for aerobic fitness. It is also possible for
a test to be highly reliable for one group (e.g., college tennis
players) but only moder ately reliable for another group (e.g., grade
school tennis players) because of differences in physical or emotional
maturi ty and ski ll level, which can af fect test perf ormance.
There are several ways to determine the reliability of a test; the
most obvious one is to admin ister the same test several times to the
same group of athletes. Statistical correlation, such as the
intraclass-correlation coefficient , of the scores from two test
739
administr ations provides a measur e of test–retest reliability . Any
difference between the two sets of scores represents measur ement
error. Another statistic that can be calculated is the typical error of
measurement  (TE), which includes both the equipment error and
biological variation of athletes (18). The difference between two sets
of scor es can arise f rom a number of di fferent factors (2):
Intrasubject (wi thin subjects) v ariabi lity
Lack of interr ater (between r aters) r eliability or agr eement
Intrarater (wi thin raters) v ariabi lity
Failure of the test i tself to pr ovide consistent r esults
Reliability is a measure of the degree of consistency or
repeatability of a test. A test must be reliable to be
valid, because highly variable results have little
meaning.
Intrasubject variability  is a lack of consistent performance by
the person being tested. Interrater reliability , also referred to as
objectivity  or interrater agreement  (2), is the degree to which
different raters agree in their test results over time or on repeated
occasions; it is a measur e of consistency . A clearly defined scoring
system and competent scorers who are trained and experienced with
the test are essential to enhance interr ater reliability. For example,
even a test that appears simple, such as timing a 40-yard (37 m)
sprint with a stopw atch, can exhibi t both random and systematic
error if the timer is not trained and experienced. Sprint times
obtained using handheld stopwatches are typical ly shorter than
those obtaine d using automatic timers, because raters using
stopw atches exhibi t reaction-time delay when pressing the start
button in response to the gun but do not delay in pressing the
button at the finish line because they can see the athlete
approaching. Interrater reliability is particularly important if different
scorers administer tests to different subgr oups of athletes. A
subgr oup with a relatively lenient scorer will have artificially inflated
740
scores. To get an accurate measur e of improvement, the same
scorer should test a group at the beginning and the end of the
training period. If there are two scorers and the scorer at the
beginning is more or less lenient than the scorer at the end, the
resulting measurements may be worthless for compar ative purposes.
Consider a situation in which  an athlete is tested in the squat. If the
pretest scorer is more lenient (requiring less depth on the squat)
than the posttest scorer, the athlete may achiev e a lower test score
on the posttest despite having made a significant improvement in
strength.
Sources of interr ater differences include variations in calibrating
testing devices, preparing athletes, and running the test. Different
testers may motiv ate athletes to different degrees, based on factors
such as personal ity, status, physical appear ance, demeanor , and sex.
A common scenario that increases interr ater variabi lity occurs when
the strength and condi tioning  professional tests some of the athletes
while an assistant tests others. The athletes may be inspired to do
better on the tests administer ed by the strength and condi tioning
professional.
The Scientific Process
Strength and condi tioning professional s should establ ish a sound scienti fic process
when it comes to selecting, administering, interpr eting, and applying physical tests
with their athletes. The scienti fic process of testing should begin with identi fying
clear questions that physical testing can answer , based on observ ations specific to
the context of the athlete and his or her sport. Without establ ishing clear questions
(the rationale) for physical testing, there is a risk of testing athletes for the sake of
it, which is both inefficient and poten tially unethical. A proposed framework for
scienti fic process of physical test selection, with an example of a common
performance question, is shown in figure 13.1 .
741
Figure 13.1 A proposed framework for the scientific process of physical test
selection.
Intrarater variability  is the lack of consistent scores by a given
tester . This differs from interr ater reliability, which refers to the
degree of agreement between different testers. For example, a
strength and condi tioning professional eager to see improvement
may unintentio nally be more lenient on a posttest than on a pretest.
Other causes of intrarater variabi lity include inadequate training;
inattentiv eness; lack of concentr ation; or failure to follow
standar dized procedur es for device calibration, athlete preparation,
test administr ation, or test scoring. To avoid such problems, accurate
and consistent athletic testing should be a priority for all strength
and condi tioning pr ofessionals.
Finally, sometimes the test itself might fail to provide consistent
results. This may occur if a physical performance test requires a
technique in which the athlete has not developed consistency . More
technique-intensiv e tests gener ally exhibi t greater variabi lity in
results and r equire mor e pretest pr actice to pr oduce consistency .
742