# Chapter 14: Administration, Scoring, and Interpretation of Selected Tests

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

**PDF Pages:** 764--853

CHAPTER  14
ADMINISTRATION, SCORING, AND
INTERPRETATION OF SELECTED TESTS
David J. Heikkinen, PhD, Jo Clubb, MS, and John McMahon, PhD
The authors would like to acknowledge the significant contributions of Michael McGuigan, Everett Harman, and John Garhammer
to this chapter .
After completing this chapter, you will be able to
discern the best w ays to measur e selected par ameters r elated to athletic perf ormance;
administer field tests appr opriately;
evaluate and analyz e test data and mak e normativ e comparisons;
understand appr opriate statistics; and
combine the r esults of selected tests to gener ate an athletic pr ofile.
As discussed in chapter 13, the strength and condi tioning professional—often referred to as the
tester  in this chapte r—who has a broad understanding of exercise science can effectively choose
and use tests and measur ements to make training program decisions that help athletes optimiz e
their physical preparation and maximiz e their potential.  To do this effectively, the tester must
administer tests correctly, analyze test data accurately (or understand how test data have been
analyz ed if the tester is not responsible for this, such as when using proprietary softw are), and then
combine the results of selecte d tests to gener ate an athlet ic profile. This chapter covers these basic
aspects of testing performance-r elated parameters and provides compr ehensiv e age- and sport-
specific descriptiv e and normativ e data f or selected tests.
764
Measuring Parameters of Athletic Performance
Athleticism incorporates many physical abilities, some of which are much more amenable to training
than others. Such abilities may be called gener al components of athletic perfo rmance —that is,
abilities that enable effective responses to the various physical demands of a specific sport or
event. This section f ocuses on how each component can be tested and highl ights r elevant issues.
Maximum Muscular Strength (Low-Speed Strength)
Maximum muscular strength tests can be split into dynamic or isometric demands; those that
involve relatively low movement speeds reflect low-speed muscular strength . In this case,
muscular strength is related to the force a muscle or muscle group can exert in one maximal effort
while maintaining proper form, and it can be quanti fied by the maximum weight that can be lifted
once (the 1-repetition maximum [1RM]) in exercises such as the bench press or back squat, or the
maximum force that can be exerted at a particular isokinetic velocity (5, 6, 45, 72, 100, 101, 103,
109, 124). Because 1RM tests do not require expensiv e equipment and reflect the kind of dynamic
ability necessary in sport, they are the maximal strength tests of choice for most strength and
condi tioning pr ofessionals.
In general, 1RM tests are administer ed after the athlete has warmed up by performing a few
sets of the test exercise with submaximal loads, beginn ing with a relatively light load. The first
attempt is usually with approximately 50% of the athlete’ s estimated 1RM weight. After the athlete
has rested enough to feel recovered from the previous attempt (1-5 min, depending on the
difficulty of the attempt), the strength and condi tioning professional increases the weight
somewhat, based on the ease with which the previous trial was performed. A skilled strength and
condi tioning professional should, within three to five attempts following warm-up , be able to find
the athlete’ s 1RM load to wi thin a f ew per centage points of the true v alue.
While testing the athlete’ s 1RM is a time-tested and reliable way to assess maximal strength,
many strength and condi tioning professionals have begun to use isometric tests to more
compr ehensiv ely assess the athlete’ s maximal force production capaci ties (5, 6, 19, 29, 45, 72, 100,
101, 103, 124). These types of tests are particularly appealing because they are nonfatiguing and
are often integr ated into an athlete’ s regular training program (i.e., training is testing). Typical ly
administer ed with the use of a force plate (or pair of force plates) or force cell that is integr ated
into a custom testing device,  these tests allow for the gener ation of a force–time curve that can be
used to quanti fy the rate at which force is produced as well as the maximum force exerted against
an immovable object (e.g., bar) (29, 92). Regardless of the isometric testing device used, these
tests are performed after a suitable warm-up , often progressing from 50% effort to 90% before
performing thr ee maximum isometric trials that ar e perf ormed f or 3- to 5-second dur ation (29, 59).
Given that strength is highly influenced by body mass, expressing maximum muscular strength
test results relative to body weight is valuable. Ratio standards can be used to determine relative
strength (43) by dividing the weight lifted (in a dynamic test) or force produced (in an isometric
test) by the athlete’ s body weight. Relative strength from a 1RM test can be expressed as the total
weight lifted (lb or kg) divided  by body mass (lb or kg). To express the same from an isometric test,
maximal force exerted in newtons is divided by bodyweight converted into newtons (lb × 4.44, or
kg × 9.81). Ratio scaling allows comparisons between athletes normal ized to body weight.
Howev er, this simple approach assumes that strength is directly proportional to body mass (43),
which is not necessari ly the case. Therefore, allometri c scaling has also been recommended,
particularly in settings with wide variation in body size and strength. Dividing strength by body
mass raised to an appropriate power can eliminate the effects of body mass, although debate
remains r egarding the most appr opriate scal ing exponents (33, 43, 83).
765
Anaerobic or Maximum Muscular Power (High-Speed
Strength)
High-speed muscular strength  or maximal anaerobic muscular power  (or anaerobic
power ) is related to the ability of muscle tissue to exert high force while contracting at a high
speed. Tests of strength and power are of very short duration, are performed at maximal
movement speeds, and produce very high-power outputs. High-speed maximal muscular power
tests are often called (maximal) anaerobic power tests. Scores on high-speed muscular strength
tests include the 1RM of explosive exercises (e.g., the power clean, snatch, push jerk), the height
of a vertical jump, and the time to sprint up a staircase (e.g., Margaria-K alamen test) (69, 100, 103,
124, 126). Because explosiv e exercise tests take about 1 second while low-speed maximal strength
tests generally require 2 to 5 seconds to complete, phosphocr eatine and adenosine triphosphate
(ATP) stored in the active muscle(s) are the primary energy sources for both types of tests.
Maintaining correct technique or form is also important when measuring anaer obic power for both
performance v alidity and saf ety reasons.
Most maximal muscular strength tests involve relatively slow movement speeds
and therefore reflect low-speed strength. Assessment of high-speed muscular
strength can involve measuring the 1RM of explos ive resistance training exercises
or the height of a vertical jump.
Power output reflects the interpla y between force and velocity. The height of a jump is a function
of the force applied to the ground that is greater than the athlete’ s body weight over the time it
was applied (this is referred to as net impulse ) while he or she extends the ankles, knees, and hips
to propel upward. A larger net impulse (force × time) leads to a higher velocity at which the athlete
leaves the ground. An athlete may not improve in jump height after gaining body weight during a
resistance training cycle, making it appear that power output is unchanged. Howev er, because the
athlete is heavier and propels the body to the same height, indicating the same takeoff velocity, an
increase in power output is likely. This applies to any test in which body weight is manipulated
(e.g., running up stairs). Moving a heavier body at the same speed requires a higher power output.
It is up to the strength and condi tioning professional to interpret the interpla y between changes in
body weight, velocity, and power output accordingly , because for some athletes, such as those from
collision-based sports, gains in absolute power through weight gain may be beneficial, but for
athletes who benefi t primari ly from moving at high absolu te velocities, a reduction in velocity owing
to weight gain ma y be detrimental.
An alternativ e class of anaer obic power tests involves the use of a cycle ergometer . This type of
test can be advantageous for the strength and condi tioning professional in some injury situations in
which running is restricted or when the athlete participates in a non-bodyweight -support sport such
as rowing or cycling. The most commonly used test of this type is the Wingate anaer obic test. A
field test protocol involves use of a cycle ergometer with mechanical means of adjusting resistance
and measuring  pedal revolutions (i.e., revolutions per second). In a laboratory setting, an
electr onical ly instrumented ergometer can simplify parameter measur ement and improve accuracy.
Typical protocols involve a basic warm-up followed by a 30-second test interv al (39). In this test,
resistance is applied quickly after the individual reaches a near-maximal pedal ing rate (typical ly 90-
110 rpm). The resistance applied is proportional to body weight (e.g., 7.5%); the percentage is
greater for trained athletes than for individuals with less training. Work performed is determined
from the resistance value and number of pedal revolutions. Power is gener ally calculated as work
divided by time for each 5-second time interv al during the 30-second test. Parameters typical ly
766
calculated include peak power , average power , and a fatigue index such as a ratio of maximum to
minimum interv al power . Norms f or cycle er gometer tests ar e available (71, 103).
Load-Velocity Profile
Velocity-based training (VBT) using commer cially available technology has become an increasingly
popular metho d for measuring bar speed and displacement during the performance of individual
resistance training exercises. These technologies allow testers to measur e the intensi ty of an
exercise using bar velocity as a metric rather than simply using percentages of a 1RM (15, 156).
These methods are based on the inverse relationship between bar speed and the weight lifted.
Specifically, as the absolute weight on the bar increases, a linear decrease in bar velocity is typical ly
recorded. Using this knowledge, strength and condi tioning professionals can create an
individual ized load– velocity profile by performing a series of sets performed with progressively
increasing loads (i.e., 20%, 40%, 60%, 80%, and 90% of 1RM) (156). The creation of the load–
velocity profile has been suggested to be useful for evaluating and prescribing exercise intensi ty
during resistan ce training programs and has also been suggested to be a useful tool for estimating
or monitoring the 1RM. When the load– velocity profile is created from a series of increasing loads
as a percentage of the 1RM with the back squat exercise (figure 14.1) a linear relationship exists
between load and velocity (14). Howev er, when the 1RM back squat is estimated from the load–
velocity profile, it is highly variable and consistently results in an overestimation of the athlete’ s
1RM and should not be used for 1RM prediction (56, 89). When the current body of scienti fic
knowledge is examined using the load– velocity profile to predict the 1RM on a day-to-da y basis, it
may result in the mispr ogramming of training loads and, in some instances, the programming of
loads that exceed the athlete’ s capaci ties (14, 56, 60). As such, it is gener ally recommended that
the 1RM should be directly tested when seeking to determine an athlete’ s maximal strength in a
given ex ercise, and the load– velocity profile should not be used to estimate the 1RM (56, 89).
Anaerobic Capacity
Anaerobic capacity  is the maxima l rate of energy production by the combined phosphagen and
anaer obic glycolytic energy systems for moder ate-dur ation activities. It is typical ly quanti fied as the
maximal power output during muscular activity between 30 and 90 seconds using a variety of tests
for the upper and lower body (39, 103, 124, 151), as opposed to maximal anaer obic power tests,
which last no longer than a f ew seconds.
Local Muscular Endurance
Local muscular endurance  is the ability of certain muscles or muscle groups to perform repeated
contractions against a submaximal resistance (18, 103). A test of local muscular endur ance should
be performed in a continuous manner for several seconds to several minutes without the advantage
of rest periods and without extraneous body movements. Examples include performing a maximal
number of repetitions of the chin-up , parallel bar dip, or push-up exercises or a resistance training
exercise using a fixed load (e.g., a percentage of an athlete’ s 1RM or body weight) (38, 46, 94, 100,
103).
Aerobic Capacity
Aerobic capacity , also called aerobic power , is the maximum rate at which an athlete can
produce energy through oxidation of energy sources (carboh ydrates, fats, and proteins) and is
usually expressed as a volume of oxygen consumed per kilogram of body weight per minute (i.e.,
mL · kg−1 · min−١ )(95). Few strength and condi tioning professionals have the equipment to
measur e oxygen consumption  directly, so aerobic capaci ty is gener ally estimated by performance in
aerobic endur ance activities such as running 1 mile (1.6 km) or more (69, 111, 120). It can also be
767
estimated using other field tests such as the maximal aerobic speed (MAS) test (87) and the Yo-Yo
intermi ttent r ecovery test (10, 18, 85, 86).
768
769
FIGURE 14.1  Load– velocity profiling.
Reprinted by permission from H.G. Banyard, K. Nosaka, and G.G. Haff, “Reliability and Validity of the Load-Velocity Relationship to Predict the 1RM Back Squat,” The
Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research 31, no. 7 (2017): 1897-1904.
Agility
Agility  traditional ly has been consider ed the ability to stop, start, and change the direction of the
whole body rapidly (134, 143). Agility consists of two main components: speed in changing
direction and cogni tive factors (134). The defini tion of agility has been revised to take into account
the perceptual qualities, and it is now consider ed “a rapid, whole-body , change of direction or
speed in response to a sports-speci fic stimulus” (134, 143). Agility testing therefore involves tests
of change of direction with a cogni tive component, such an anticipation and reaction. Tests such as
the T-test, the 5-0-5 test, the 5-10-5 test (also known as the pro agility test), and the L-drill (also
known as the 3-cone dri ll) are used to assess change of dir ection.
Speed
Speed  is movement distance per unit of time and is typical ly quantified as the time taken to cover
a fixed distanc e. The time taken to sprint from a stationary start over a short distance such as 10
yards or meters reflects acceleration, whereas longer sprints such as 40 yards (37 m) would
measur e maxim um speed (163). Tests of speed are not usually conducted over distances greater
than 100 meters (109 yd) because longer distances reflect anaer obic or aerobic capaci ty more than
absolute abi lity to mo ve the body at maximal speed (103, 124 , 163).
Electr onic timing devices are becoming more accessible to strength and condi tioning
professionals due to increased ease of use and lower prices. Howev er, many tests of speed and
agility are administer ed using hand timing with a stopw atch, which can be a major source of
measur ement error, especial ly if the tester is not sufficiently trained. Even under ideal condi tions,
stopw atch-measur ed sprint times are up to 0.24 seconds faster than electr onical ly measur ed times
because of the tester ’s reaction-time delay in pressing the stopw atch button at the gun and the
tendency to anticipate and press the button early as the athlete approaches the finish line (45, 67,
125). Therefore, strength and condi tioning professionals are encour aged to use electr onic timing
devices for tests of speed and agility when they are available. It is also more informativ e to
measur e split times, because this can provide the strength and condi tioning professional with
insight into the speed and acceleration capaci ties of the athletes. For example, times for 10 yards
(9 m), 20 yards (18 m), and 40 yards (37 m) can be recorded and used to calculate split times and
maximal v elocity. Final ly, tests of speed and agi lity require proper f ootwear and a nonsl ip surf ace.
Athletic Motor Skill C ompetency
Developing movement skills that enable children and adolescents to move in an effective and
efficient manne r during physical activity and sport is central to long-term athletic development. The
athletic moto r skill competencies  (AMSC), proposed by Lloyd and colleagues (90), presents
foundational movement skills that underpin athletic movements. The AMSC and examples of
associated movement screening exercises are presented in figure 14.2 and can be used to monitor
the development of young athletes (123). The use of the AMSC and other screening tools provide a
method for tracking athlete development with the use of various assessment tools that evaluate
movement patterns and other qualitative aspects of movement. As such, these types of tools are
best described as process-oriented assessments (150). Overall, the use of movement screening
information can be used by practitioners to identi fy strength, mobility, and neuromuscular deficits,
which can then guide pr ogramming decisions.
770
FIGURE 14.2  Athletic motor ski ll competencies and examples of associated mo vement scr een ex ercises.
Adapted from Lloyd and Oliver (2020); Pullen et al. (2022).
Assessing movement patterns can reveal indicators of injury susceptibi lity in young athletes.
Well-establ ished screening tools such as the functional movement screen (FMS) , tuck jump
assessment (TJA), landing error scoring system, and drop jump assessments are commonly used
for this purpose (123). Additional ly, tailored movement screening protocols have been devised
specific to particular sports, aiming to pinpoint injury risks, performance limitations, or even talent
identi fication opportuni ties. Tailored training programs can be developed by strength and
condi tioning professionals to target specific individual needs, including addressing movement
limitations.
Multiple movement screens assess parts of the AMSC spectrum, but consensus has not been
reached regarding which are most appropriate for a given cohort. One narrative review (122)
included 10 movement screens, including but not limited to the FMS, TJA, resistance training skills
battery (RTSB), and back squat assessment (BSA). Interested readers are directed to the review by
Pullen and colleagues (122) for more detailed information on the methodologies, reliabilities, and
strengths and limitations of each of these tests when selecting the screening test that is the most
appropriate f or the en vironment.
771
Implementing movement screens can be complex due to variations in implementation practices,
criteria, grading, and movement analysis. Understandin g reliability of screen implementers is
critical, althoug h both novice and expert raters can achieve substantial reliability (104). Recording
movements for retrospectiv e analysis after testing is recommended, because it allows raters to
review video footage, pause, slow down, and rewatch to accurately assess movements. The
number of repetitions performed and how they are graded are crucial. Due to ongoing brain
matur ation, youth exhibi t higher movement variabi lity, and performance regressions can coincide
with growth spurts (54, 68). Therefore, movement screens should assess each repetition for
consistency . Some screens, such as the FMS and RTSB, use a best repetition technique, which limits
the assessment of movemen t consistency . Others, like the TJA, use a sum-of -repetition scoring
system, capturing movement variabi lity. Considering total body versus segmental analysis is also
important because total body approaches like the FMS may miss specific deficiencies or
compensations, wher eas segmental analysis pr ovides detai led insights (123).
Flexibility
Flexibility  can be defined as the range of motion about a body joint (13). Typical devices for
measuring flexibility include manual and electric goniome ters, which measur e joint angle, and the
sit-and-r each box, which is used to evaluate the combined flexibi lity of the lower back and hips.
Flexibi lity measurements are more reliable when standar dized warm-up and static stretching
precede the flexibi lity assessm ent. During a flexibi lity test, the athlete should move slowly into the
fully stretched  position and hold this position. Ballistic stretching, characteriz ed by bouncing to
increase r ange of motion, cannot be al lowed during an y flexibi lity testing (69, 116).
A number of movement competency screens are available for strength and condi tioning
professionals and can be used to assess overall flexibi lity, mobility, and gener al movement
competency of athletes. Howev er, there is no current consensus on which screen to use, nor a
clearly establ ished link between movement screening results and injury (98, 116). Competent
strength and condi tioning professionals perform postur al and performance screening routinely by
viewing the athletes’ performance in training. For exam ple, the overhead squat is a common
exercise that is used as a part of movement screens because it allows assessment of bilateral
mobility of the hips, knees, and ankles along wi th the shoulder and thor acic spine (3, 25, 126).
Balance and Stability
Balance  is the ability to maintain static and dynamic equilibrium  or the ability to maintain the
body’s center of gravity over its base of support (103, 124). Stability  is a measur e of the ability to
return to a desired position following a postur al disturbance (103). Athletes with poor balance are
at a greater risk of lower limb injuries (76, 77, 96). Athletes have also been shown to have greater
balance compa red to nonathletes (38). Balance testing can be used to assess stability increases
with training and in a numbe r of different ways (103). Commonly used tests include timed static
standing tests (eyes closed and standing on one or both legs) (21, 101), balance tests using
unstable surfaces (101), and tests using special ized balance testing equipment (e.g., NeuroCom,
Biodex Balance System) (124). These include a large number of tests that can evaluate different
aspects of balance and stability (103). The balance error scoring system (BESS) and star excursion
balance test (SEBT) have very good reliability and a substantial body of literature supporting their
use (21, 57 , 66, 103, 115, 146).
Body Composition
Body composition  usually refers to the relative proportions by weight of fat and lean tissue.
Although there are sophisticated and expensiv e devices capable of partitioning the lean component
into bone and soft tissue, the body composi tion procedur es typical ly performed by strength and
772
condi tioning professionals use the basic two-component (fat and lean mass) model. With a trained
and competent tester , the skinfold measur ement technique is the most valid and reliable (r = 0.99)
means for assessing body fatness that is gener ally available to the strength and condi tioning
professional and is preferable to body circumference methods (95). Other methods available to
strength and condi tioning professionals include bioimpedance devices and total body
plethysmogr aphy, although dual X -ray absorptiometry (D XA) is often labeled as a gold standar d.
The skinfold method uses calipers that measur e the thickness of a double layer of finger -pinched
skin and subcutaneous fat. A good skinfold measur emen t device should squeez e the fold of skin
and fat with constant pressure regardless of the amount of tissue being measur ed (41, 69, 120).
Circumference methods may be added, becaus e they are relatively quick and simple and can yield
important chronic disease risk information. For example, waist circumference can assess abdominal
fat, and a high waist circumference is associated with an increased risk for type 2 diabetes, high
cholester ol, high blood pr essure, and certain t ypes of car diac disease (69).
Anthropometry
Anthropometry , which is the science of measur ement applied to the human body, gener ally
includes measu rements of height, weight, and selected body girths (69). Ideally, height should be
measur ed with a stadiometer . If a stadiometer is not available, measur ement of height requires a
flat wall against which the athlete stands, with a measuring tape attached or unattached to the
wall. Height is usual ly measur ed wi thout shoes to the near est quarter -inch or hal f-centimeter (103).
The most accurate body mass or body weight measur ement is performed with a certified balance
scale, which is gener ally more reliable than a spring scale and should be calibrated on a regular
basis (103). A calibrated electr onic scale is an acceptable alternativ e. Athletes should be weighed
while wearing minimal dry clothing (e.g., workout shorts  and T-shirt, no shoes). For comparison
measur ements at a later date, they should dress similarly and be weighed at the same time of day.
The most reliable body mass measur ements are made in the morning upon rising, after elimination
and before ingestion of food or fluids. Level of hydration can result in variabi lity of body mass
(weight). Thus, athletes should be encour aged to avoid eating salty food (which increases water
retention) the da y before weighing and to go to bed normal ly hydrated.
The most reliable girth measur ements are usually obtaine d with the aid of a flexible measuring
tape equipped with a spring-loaded attachment at the end that, when pulled out to a specified
mark, exerts a fixed amount of tension on the tape. Girth measur ements should be made at the
beginning of a tr aining period f or comparison wi th subsequent measur ements (69, 103).
773
Monitoring Protocols, Procedures, and Equipment
When selecting tests for athletic assessment, it is crucial to consider the protocols, procedur es, and
equipment necessary to effectively implement them. Every athletic environment is unique, requiring
careful consider ation to optimiz e these aspects f or speci fic set tings.
Protocols  are systematic plans outlining guidel ines to achiev e specific objectiv es. In athlete
testing, they provide a compr ehensiv e framework within which procedur es are developed, setting
standar ds for consistency , reliability, and validity (as explained in detail in chapter 13). A monitoring
protocol represents the overarching strategy for conducting performance assessments, detailing the
overall approach for tracking an athlete’ s physical capaci ties and specifying test types and
frequencies thr oughout the season.
Using Artificial Intelligence to Analyze Testing Data
Artificial intellige nce (AI) has emerged as a potential ly transformative tool in sport. Yet there is still much confusion,
apprehension, and skepticism about the value of AI. AI is defined as “the ability of a digital computer to perform tasks
commonly associated with intelligent beings … such as the ability to reason, discover meaning, gener alize, or learn from
past experience” (31). Within AI, machine learning  (ML)  is the ability of computer machines to learn from and develop
data without human input or interaction. These approaches offer various advantages to sport, including automating or
semiautomating data collection, processing data into meaningf ul insights, identifying crucial information related to health
and performance, and creating models  that support complex decision making  (40). Such models can handle a vast number
of factors and their inter actions, which can be too complex f or humans to pr ocess.
In the context of athlete testing, AI holds numer ous potential applications. Its capaci ty to process large volumes of data
is particularly suited to biomechanical analysis, leading to its integr ation into a number of movement analysis solutions (12).
Moreover, AI can be used to streamline certain technologies and tests, making jump, speed, and velocity-based gym
exercise assessments feasible with just a mobile phone (9). By leveraging the quality of modern phone camer as and
applying AI and ML techniques to analyze the data, such tests become accessible to more strength and condi tioning
professionals. Howev er, it is crucial f or practitioners to scrutiniz e the ac curacy and v alidity of such technologies.
The use of AI in injury prediction is a widely debated subject (12), yet its potential to enhance existing approaches
cannot be overlook ed. The ability of AI and ML to process vast quanti ties of data and compr ehend complex interactions
within and across data sets may further such applications. Nevertheless, practitioners must ensur e sufficient data collection
quanti ty and quality. As the maxim “garbage in, garbage out” implies, the success of any model is contingent on the quality
of its inputs. AI’s application in analyzing athlete testing data is a burgeoning  field that holds promise for the future. Given
its rapid and constant ev olution, i t is imper ative that pr actitioners sta y informed of dev elopments in this ar ea.
Procedures  are detailed, step-b y-step instructions on executing specific tasks within the
protocol framework. They provide explicit guidance on methods to ensur e consistent data
collection. In physical performance assessments, procedur es detail the steps for conducting the
tests outlined in this chapter , such as vertical jumps, aerobic capaci ty, or agility performance,
ensuring standar dized methodologies and r eliable data.
Selecting appropriate equipm ent for athlete physical performance tests can be challenging due to
the wide range of tools and technologies now available. A decision-making framework for
implementing technology in sport (159) suggests f our reflectiv e questions:
1. Would the inf ormation pr ovided be helpf ul?
2. Can y ou trust the inf ormation pr ovided?
3. Can y ou integr ate, manage, and analyz e the data pr ovided ef fectively?
4. Can y ou implement the technology in y our pr actice?
Selecting suitable technology involves ensuring device  validity and reliability, considering
practical ity and ease of use, and confirming relevance to athletes and their specific sport. This
compr ehensiv e approach ensur es that the assessments are accurate, relevant, and actionable,
supporting athlete perf ormance and r educed risk of injury .
774
In summary , considering protocols, procedur es, and equipment prior to commencement of
testing is essential. Regularly reviewing these aspects ensures testing batteries remain consistent,
relevant, and ef fective for athletes’ tr aining pr ograms.
SELECTED TEST PROTOCOLS AND SCORING DATA
MAXIMUM MUSCULAR STRENGTH (LOW-SPEED STRENGTH)
  1  1RM B ench Pr ess  304
  2  1RM B ench Pul l  304
  3  1RM B ack S quat   305
MAXIMUM MUSCULAR POWER (HIGH-SPEED STRENGTH)
  4  Isometric Mid- Thigh Pul l  305
  5  Nordic Hamstring T est  307
  6  1RM P ower Clean   308
  7  Standing Long (B road) Jump   308
  8  Vertical Jump   308
  9  Squat Jump (Static V ertical Jump)   311
10  Drop Jump   312
11  Rebound Jump   313
12  Margaria-K alamen T est  314
13  Velocity-Based T esting (VB T)  315
ANAEROBIC CAPACITY
14  300-Yard (274 m) Shut tle Run  316
15  90-Second B ox Jump T est  317
LOCAL MUSCULAR ENDURANCE
16  Partial Curl-Up   318
17  Push-Up   319
18  Army Fitness T est (AF T) Hand-R elease Push-Up (HRP)   320
19  YMCA B ench Pr ess Test  321
AEROBIC CAPACITY
20  1.5-Mi le (2.4 km) R un  321
21  12-Minute R un  321
22  Yo-Yo Intermi ttent R ecovery Test  322
23  Maximal Aer obic Speed T est  323
24  30-15 I ntermi ttent Fi tness T est (IF T)  323
CHANGE OF DIRECTION OR AGILITY
25  T-Test  324
26  Hexagon T est  325
27  5-10-5 T est  326
28  5-0-5 T est  326
775
29  Illinois T est  327
SPEED
30  Straight-Line Sprint T ests  327
BALANCE AND STABILITY
31  Balance Err or Scoring S ystem (BES S)  328
32  Star Ex cursion B alance T est (SEB T)  329
FLEXIBILITY
33  Sit-and-R each T est  330
34  Overhead S quat   331
BODY COMPOSITION
35  Skinfold Measur ements   332
36  Bioelectrical I mpedance (BIA)   334
ANTHROPOMETRY
37  Girth Measur ements   334
Maximum Muscular Strength (Low-Speed Strength)
  1  1RM BENCH PRESS
Equipment
A barbel l, weight plates, and two safety locks; enough total weight to accommodate the
maximum load of the strongest athlete; and a variety of plate sizes to allow for 5-pound (2.3
kg) gr adations in weight
A stur dy bench pr ess bench wi th integr al bar r ack (pr eferably of adjustable height)
Personnel
One spot ter, one r ecorder
Procedure
1. Instruct the athlete in proper technique for the flat barbel l bench press as described in chapter
16.
2. The spotter stands at the head end of the bench throughout the test to help in raising the bar
on a f ailed at tempt and to help the athlete place the bar back on the r ack.
3. As with any maximal strength test, the athlete first does a specific warm-up of 5 to 10
repetitions wi th a light to moder ate load.
4. Usual ly, at least two heavier warm-up sets of 2 to 5 repetitions each are completed before the
first actual 1RM at tempt.
5. Gener ally, it is desirable to measur e the 1RM within three to five attempts after the warm-up;
otherwise, f atigue ma y detr act from the final r esult.
6. A more detailed step-b y-step method for the 1RM protocol is shown in figure 18.8 on page
546.
Note:  Normativ e and descriptiv e data for the 1RM bench press are presented in tables 14.1 through
14.5 near the end of the chapter .
  2  1RM BENCH PULL
776
Equipment
A barbel l, weight plates, and two safety locks; enough total weight to accommodate the
maximum load of the strongest athlete; and a variety of plate sizes to allow for 5-pound (2.3
kg) gr adations in weight
A high flat bench (speci fically, the seal r ow bench  is widely a vailable f or this ex ercise)
Personnel
One spot ter, one r ecorder
Procedure
1. Instruct the athlete in pr oper technique f or the bench pul l (figure 14.3a).
2. The athlete gr asps the bar wi th a closed pr onated grip , wider than shoulder width.
3. Bench height is set so the athlete can use a comfortable grip while the weight is off the ground
in the hang posi tion.
4. The athlete starts the lift from the hang position, and the grip should be consistent from test
to test.
5. The bar is pulled up toward the lower chest or upper abdomen with the elbows pointed up
(figure 14.3b).
6. The head position can remain either down or to the side but must remain in contact with the
bench thr oughout the test.
7. A valid repetition is one in which the bar touches the underside of the bench and the bar is
lower ed in a controlled manner to the hang position with full elbow extension without touching
the gr ound.
8. The feet should remain off the ground throughout the test and in the same position
throughout.
9. A mor e detai led step-b y-step method f or the 1RM pr otocol is shown in figure 18.8  (page 546 ).
Note:  Descriptiv e data for the 1RM bench pull are presented in table 14.4 near the end of the
chapter .
777
FIGURE 14.3  (a) Starting posi tion and  (b) top posi tion of the bench pul l.
  3  1RM BACK SQUAT
Equipment
A barbel l, weight plates, and two safety locks; enough total weight to accommodate the
maximum load of the strongest athlete; and a variety of plate sizes to allow for 5-pound (2.3
kg) gr adations in weight
A sturdy squat rack with adjustable spotting bars to suppo rt the weight of the bar if the athlete
is unable to rise (as an al ternativ e, one spot ter can be used at each end of the bar)
A flat and sol id surf ace to stand on
Personnel
Two spot ters, one r ecorder
Procedure
1. Instruct the athlete in pr oper technique f or the back squat as described in chapter 16 .
2. Warm-up sets are performed as for the 1RM bench press test. Howev er, the loads lifted are
typical ly heavier than in the 1RM bench press test, so the load increments will be greater than
those of the 1RM bench pr ess.
3. Refer to figure 18.8  (page 546 ) for a 1RM testing pr otocol.
778
Note:  Normativ e and descriptiv e data for the 1RM back squat are presented in tables 14.1 through
14.5 near the end of the chapter .
Maximum Muscular Power (High-Speed Strength)
  4  ISOMETRIC MID-THIGH PULL
The isometric mid-thigh pul l (IMTP) is a mul tijoint maximal isometric str ength test.
Equipment
Force plate (or two adjacent force plates) that samples at a minimum of 1,000 Hz, but it can
also be conducted using a str ain gauge or cr ane scale that samples at 100 to 133 Hz (29, 32)
An immovable fixed bar to measur e peak force and time-d ependent variables such as the rate
of force development; this specific testing rack is designed for isometric testing and allows for
stepwise adjustments to the bar height. If a strain gauge  is used, a handle is attached to the
strain gauge wi th a chain.
Weightl ifting str aps
Computer or tablet with special ized softw are that allows for the collection and analysis of
force–time curv e data
Goniometer to r ecord the knee and hip angles
Personnel
One tester/r ecorder
779
FIGURE 14.4  Isometric mid-thigh pul l (IMTP) test posi tion.
Procedure
1. The testing rack needs to be set to a height that allows the athlete to mirror the “second pull”
position used in weightl ifting (i.e., clean or power clean). In this position the immo vable bar is
positioned across the upper portion of the thigh, immediately inferior to the pelvis (58) (figure
14.4).
2. When performing the test, the athlete should have an upright trunk position (62, 63) with the
feet roughly hip-width apart and a slight flex of the knee while grasping the bar with a clean
grip while using weightl ifting straps (58). In this position the knee angle should be
approximately 120 degrees and 145 degrees, and the hip angle should be approximately 125
degrees and 150 degrees (62). Howev er, it is important to note that the exact bar position as
well as knee and hip angles are difficult to recommend because an individual’ s anthropometrics
will exert a lar ge influence on the exact posi tion during the test.
3. Before conduct ing the isometric mid-thigh pull test it is important that between one and three
familiarization sessions are performed in order to enhance the reliability of the test (62). Less
familiarization is needed with trained athletes, especial ly those who train regularly with
weightl ifting derivatives. First, the athlete should comple te a dynamic warm-up that includes
dynamic stretches (e.g., bodyweight squats and lunges) as well as dynamic lifting tasks (e.g.,
low-load and moder ate-load mid-thigh pulls). After this is completed, a series of progressively
intense isometric actions should be performed at perceived intensi ties of 50%, 70%, and 90%
of maximum, with 1 to 2 minutes rest between trials (29, 62). During this time the strength
780
and conditioning professional should monitor the athlete’ s body postur e and make corrections
as needed.
4. After completin g the last submaximal trial, the athlete should complete a minimum of three
maximum-ef fort trials separ ated by 1 to 2 minutes of rest. If the main goal of the test is to
determine the peak force that the athlete can produce, each trial should last between 3 and 5
seconds. If the rate of force development (RFD) is of interest, each trial should last up to 1
second (54). Regardless of which protocol is used, if the peak force between trials varies by
more than 15%, addi tional trials ar e warranted (105).
5. Regardless of the protocol used to collect the force–time  curve, all trials need to be visual ly
screened to determine whether they meet preestabl ished criteria (29). If the strength and
condi tioning professional notes any of the following, the trial should be discar ded and another
trial should be conducted:
A quiet standing period of 1 s wi th >50 N change in f orce
Pre-tension (<50 N) whi le maintaining a rigid torso bef ore initiating f orce appl ication
A countermo vement prior to the onset of f orce appl ication
Peak force at the end of the pul l
6. If the trial is deemed acceptable but the peak force of each trial is not within 15% of the
others, addi tional trials should be conducted.
7. When analyzin g the results of an IMTP test, the most common measur es include the peak
force and the force at specific time points (i.e., 50, 100, 150, 200, and 250 ms) (figure 14.5).
These metrics are often reported in absolute and relative terms (i.e., force per kg body
weight). Time- dependent variables such as the RFD and impulse are often quanti fied (and
reflect the change in force production during a certain time period as represented by Δ). The
peak RFD is typical ly quanti fied with a 20-mi llisecond moving window , while the RFD and
impulse are quanti fied during predetermined time windows  (i.e., 0-50, 0-100, 0-200, and 0-250
ms).
Note:  Normativ e data f or the IMTP ar e presented in table 14 .6 near the end of the chapter .
781
FIGURE 14.5  IMTP f orce–time curv e.
Reprinted by permission from C.J. Brady, A.J. Harrison, and T.M. Comyns, “A Review of the Reliability of Biomechanical Variables Produced During the Isometric Mid-Thigh
Pull and Isometric Squat and the Reporting of Normative Data,” Sports Biomechanics 19, no. 1 (2020): 1-25, reprinted by permission of the publisher (Taylor & Francis Ltd,
http://www.tandfonline.com).
  5  NORDIC HAMSTRING TEST
Equipment
A commer cially available instrumented device for the measur ement of eccentric hamstring
strength or a video r ecording device
A stable flooring surf ace on which the dynamometer should be placed
Personnel
One tester/r ecorder
Procedure
1. Set up the instrumented device on a stable surface. The athlete should kneel on the testing
device and place the ankles under the hooks (within which force cells are housed to quanti fy
force). The athlete should be careful to only contact the hooks with the back of the ankles and
to not push off the board with the toes in order to gain leverage. If not using an instrumented
device but using videogr aphy instead, the camer a (or mobile phone) should be placed in the
sagittal view and fixed using a tripod or similar and positioned so that the full range of motion
is recorded. The knees of the athlete should be a 90-degr ee angle of flexion relative to the
lower leg and the rest of the body (figure 14.6a). Care should be taken to ensure that the
athlete does not flex forward at the hips, because occasional ly athletes will do this in order to
reduce the ec centric loading on the hamstrings.
2. The athlete should then lean forward under control (i.e., controlled acceleration) by extending
the knees, increasing the knee angle, and maintaining a straight line from the knees through
the shoulders ( figure 14.6b).
3. After lowering to the ground in this fashion, the athlete may then use the hands to push back
up to the starting posi tion. T ypical ly, 3 to 6 sets of this test ar e perf ormed.
782
4. If using an instrumented device, record absolute force of eccentric hamstring force, typical ly
measur ed in newtons (N). Ratio or allometric scaling of peak force, as discussed earlier in the
chapter , may also be conside red with Nordic hamstring force outputs to account for variations
in body mass and length on the peak force measur emen ts. Other metrics such as torque in
newton-meters (Nm) or the percentage of asymmetry present between left and right
hamstrings may also be recorded if desired. If using videogr aphy alone, the break point angle
(the angle at which the external knee flexor moment can no longer be resisted and the athlete
loses active control of down ward motion) can be reported as a moder ate proxy of eccentric
hamstring str ength.
Note:  Descriptiv e data for the Nordic hamstring test are presented in table 14.7 near the end of the
chapter .
783
784
FIGURE 14.6  Nor dic hamstring test (wi thout an instrumented device).
  6  1RM POWER CLEAN
Note:  Because the power clean exercise has high technical demands, two athletes with the same
muscular power capaci ty can differ greatly in their tested 1RM, lessening the value of the test for
predicting athletic perf ormance.
Equipment
An Olympic-style barbel l with a revolving sleeve, weight plates, and two safety locks; enough
total weight to accommodat e the maximum load of the strongest athlete; and a variety of
plate siz es to al low for 5-pound (2.3 kg) gr adations in weight
A lifting platf orm or designated ar ea set apart f rom the r est of the f acility for saf ety
Personnel
One tester/r ecorder
Procedure
1. Instruct the athlete in pr oper technique f or the power clean as described in chapter 16 .
2. Warm-up sets are performed and load increments are selected as for the 1RM bench press
test.
3. Refer to figure 18.8  (page 546 ) for a 1RM testing pr otocol.
Note:  Normativ e and descriptiv e data for the 1RM power clean are presented in tables 14.1 through
14.4 near the end of the chapter .
  7  STANDING LONG (BROAD) JUMP
Equipment
A flat jumping area at least 20 feet (6 m) in length, which can be a gym floor, artificial turf,
grass field, or a tr ack
A tape measur e at least 10 f eet (3 m) long
Duct tape or masking tape
Permissible al ternativ e: a commer cial jumping mat pr emark ed in hal f-inch (1 cm) incr ements
Personnel
One distance judge, one r ecorder
Procedure
1. Place a 2- to 3-f oot (0.6-0.9 m) length of tape on the floor to serv e as a starting l ine.
2. The athlete stands wi th the toes just behind the starting l ine.
3. The athlete perf orms a countermo vement and jumps f orward as f ar as possible.
4. The athlete must land on the f eet for the jump to be scor ed. Otherwise, the trial is r epeated.
5. A marker is placed at the back edge of the athlete’ s rearmost heel, and the tape measur e
determines the distance between the starting l ine and the mark.
6. The best of thr ee trials is r ecorded to the near est 0.5 inch or 1 centimeter .
Note:  Normativ e and descriptiv e data for the standing long jump are presented in tables 14.8 to
14.10 near the end of the chapter .
  8  VERTICAL JUMP
785
Equipment
A force plate set up on a stable surf ace
A suitable computer , tablet, or cell phone connected to force plate hardware and with the
corresponding softw are instal led
Permissible alternativ es: a smooth wall with a ceiling higher than the highest jumper ’s jump
height plus chalk of a different color than the wall or a commer cial device for vertical jump
testing (e.g. , Vertec)
Personnel
One tester/r ecorder
Procedure (Using a Force Plate)
1. Before testing,  the tester should calibrate and set up the force plate as per the manuf acturer’s
instructions.
2. The force plate should always be set up on a stable surface (ideal ly in the same location each
time) and the force zeroed with nothing on the plates immediately before the athlete tests.
Without a preparatory or stutter step, the athlete performs a countermo vement by quickly
flexing the knees and hips, moving the trunk forward and down ward, and swinging the arms
backw ard.
3. The countermo vement jump is most commonly conducted  with hands in a fixed position on the
hips throughout the takeoff portion of the jump to isolate the power and coordination capaci ty
of the lower limbs. Jumping with the use of an arm swing  can also be tested and is referred to
as an Abalak ov jump. Either way, consistency should be used and each jump should be tracked
as to whether i t was perf ormed wi th (Abalak ov) or wi thout an arm swing.
4. Figure 14.7 shows an example of how the vertical ground reaction forces change across the
five phases of a vertical jump with a countermo vement  when measur ed with a force plate
testing system.
Procedure (Using a Wall and Chalk)
1. The tester rubs chalk on the fingertips of the athlete’ s dominant hand.
2. The athlete stands with the dominant shoulder about 6 inches (15 cm) from the wall and, with
both feet flat on the floor, reaches as high as possible with the dominant hand and makes a
chalk mark on the w all.
3. The athlete then lowers the dominant hand and, without a preparatory or stutter step,
performs a countermo vemen t by quickly flexing the knees  and hips, moving the trunk forward
and down ward, and swinging the arms backw ard. During the jump, the dominant arm reaches
upward whi le the nondominant arm mo ves down ward relative to the body .
4. At the highest point in the jump, the athlete places a second chalk mark on the wall with the
fingers of the dominant hand, using a swiping motion of the fingers. The score is the vertical
distance between the two chalk marks.
5. The best of thr ee trials is r ecorded to the near est 0.5 inch or 1.0 centimeter .
Procedure (Using a Commercial Vertec Device)
1. The tester adjusts the height of the stack of movable color-coded horizontal plastic vanes to be
within the athlete’ s standing reach height. The highest vane that can be reached and pushed
forward with the dominant hand while the athlete stands flat-footed determines the standing
touch height.
2. The vane stack is then raised by a measur ed distance (mark ed on the shaft holding the vanes)
so that the athlete will not jump higher or lower than the set of vanes. This requires a rough
786
estimate of how high the particular athlete will jump, but a correction can be made on the
second at tempt i f necessary .
3. Without a preparatory or stutter step, the athlete performs a countermo vement by quickly
flexing the knees and hips, moving the trunk forward and down ward, and swinging the arms
backw ard (figure 14.8a). During the jump, the dominant arm reaches upward while the
nondominant arm mo ves down ward relative to the body .
4. At the highest point in the jump, the athlete taps the highest possible vane with the fingers of
the dominant hand (figure 14.8b). The score is the vertical distance between the height of the
highest vane tapped during the standing vertical  reach and the vane tapped at the highest
point of the jump .
5. The best of three trials is recorded to the nearest 0.5 inches or 1 centimeter (the distance
between adjacent v anes).
FIGURE 14.7 Example force–time curve of a countermo vement jump when measur ed with a force plate testing system. Vertical
dotted lines divide the typical phases (UP, unloading phase; BP, breaking phase; PP, propulsiv e phase; FP, flight phase; LP, landing
phase).
Reprinted by permission from Z. Anicic, D. Janicijevic, O.M. Knezevic, et al., “Assessment of Countermovement Jump: What Should We Report?,” Life 13, no. 1 (2023): 190.
https://doi.org/10.3390/life13010190. Distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by
/4.0/).
The strength and condi tioning  professional should be aware of potential sources of error with the
jump- and-r each-st yle tests. These include a disconnect between the moment when the athlete
reaches the wall or vanes with the hand and the moment the maximum height of the body’s center
of mass is achieved; additional ly, shoulder mobility issues may limit some athlete’ s reach height.
Also, jump height values calculated using common techn ologies such as force plates and contact
mats are most often measur ed as the maximum total body center of mass height relative to its
height at takeoff and not relative to its height when standing still (158). Thus, jump height values
from jump-and-r each tests should not be compar ed directly to, or used interchangeably with, jump
height values recorded with such technologies or, indeed, with different jump techniques, such as
when k eeping arms akimbo .
Note:  Descriptiv e data for the vertical jump are presented in table 14.5 and table 14.10 near the
end of the chapter .
787
FIGURE 14.8  (a) Starting posi tion and  (b) maximum height of the v ertical jump using the V ertec.
  9  SQUAT JUMP (STATIC VERTICAL JUMP)
The equipment needed and the personnel required for the squat (static) vertical jump are the same
as the v ertical jump wi th a countermo vement.
Procedure
1. The test procedur es are essential ly the same as for the vertical jump, except that the
countermo vement is removed. Begin with the athlete standing on a calibrated, zeroed force
platform. (Note:  The squat jump and vertical jump with countermo vement can also be tested
using a switch or contact mat system (figure 14.9) [158], which estimates jump height [51]
but cannot measur e force outputs. )
2. The athlete descends into a squat position (knee angle approximately 110 degrees) and holds
this posi tion for 2 to 3 seconds bef ore jumping v ertical ly, keeping hands fix ed on hips.
3. The takeoff and landing positions, as well as jumping strategy , should be the same for each
trial. Specifically, the tester should ensur e there is no countermo vement (dip) at the start of
the jump, both through visual observ ation and, where a force plate is used, by assessing the
force–time curv e.
4. The best of three trials is recorded. The ratio of the vertical jump height with
countermo vement to squat jump height can be calculated as the ec centric uti lization r atio (99).
5. Figure 14.10 shows an example of how the vertical ground reaction forces change across the
three phases of a static v ertical jump when measur ed wi th a f orce plate testing system.
Note:  Descriptiv e data for the static vertical jump are presented in table 14.10 near the end of the
chapter .
788
FIGURE 14.9   (a) Starting posi tion and  (b) maximum height of the static v ertical jump when measur ed wi th a swi tch mat.
FIGURE 14.10  Example force–tim e curve of a static vertical (squat) jump when measur ed with a force plate testing system.
Vertical dot ted lines divide the t ypical phases (BP , breaking phase; PP , propulsiv e phase; FP , flight phase; LP , landing phase).
Adapted from Z. Anicic, D. Janicijevic, O.M. Knezevic, et al., “Assessment of Countermovement Jump: What Should We Report?,” Life 13, no. 1 (2023): 190. https://doi.org
/10.3390/life13010190. Distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
789
  10  DROP JUMP
Equipment
A box that ma y vary in height f rom 8 to 16 inches (20-40 cm)
Floor wi th good tr action
Measur ement equipment such as force plates (with corresponding softw are on laptop or
tablet), swi tch mats, optoelectr onic systems, and smartphone appl ications
Personnel
One tester/r ecorder
Procedure
1. When performing a drop vertical jump, the athlete should step out before free-falling from as
close as possible to the height of the box rather than stepping down (i.e., lowering) or jumping
off (i.e., rising) the box. Box height selection for an athlete can vary but is typical ly 20
centimeters (8 in.), 30 centimeters (12 in.), or 40 centim eters (16 in.) (figure 14.11a). The
higher the box, the greater the plyometric demand. When using a device that is not flush with
the ground or base of the box when conducting the drop vertical jump test, such as when
using a switch mat, the strength and condi tioning professional should measur e the box height
from the top of the bo x to the top surf ace of the swi tch mat.
2. The athlete steps out from the box and lands on the floor, force plate, or switch mat (figure
14.11b) and, as quickly as possib le, jumps again (figure 14.11c). Drop jumps should be
performed with the athlete attempting to jump with a short ground contact time while still
aiming to jump as high as possible. A short ground contact time is achiev ed by limiting flexion
of the ankles, knees, and hips while in contact with the ground by adopting high leg stiffness
(high f orce with shal low range of motion). It is advised that at least 2 to 3 sets ar e perf ormed.
3. The most reported performan ce variables following drop vertical jump testing are jump height
(from flight time), ground contact time, and reactive strength index  (calculated as jump
height divided by ground contact time) (91). The reactiv e strength index is often consider ed an
indication of how well an athlete can recruit the fast component of the stretch-shortening
cycle.
4. Figure 14.12 shows an example of the force–time curve with labels pointing out the peak
vertical ground reaction force, contact time, and flight time when measur ed with a force plate
testing system.
790
FIGURE 14.11  (a) Starting position on box, (b) contact on switch mat, (c) maximum height of the drop jump to measur e reactiv e
strength index.
FIGURE 14.12  Example f orce–time curv e of a dr op jump .
Reprinted by permission from R. Healy and A.J. Harrison, “The Effects of a Unilateral Gluteal Activation Protocol on Single Leg Drop Jump Performance,” Sports
Biomechanics 13, no. 1 (2014): 33-46, reprinted by permission of the publisher (Taylor & Francis Ltd, http://www.tandfonline.com).
791
  11  REBOUND JUMP
Equipment
Floor wi th good tr action
Measur ement equipment such as force plates (with corresponding softw are on a laptop or
tablet), jump mats, optoelectr onic systems, and smartphone appl ications
Personnel
One tester/r ecorder
Procedure
1. Rebound-based vertical jumps require the athlete to jump from a preceding vertical jump.
When performing a rebound vertical jump, the athlete should first complete a maximal-ef fort
vertical countermo vement jump followed by either a predetermined number of rebound
vertical jump repetitions or a predetermined set duration (e.g., 10 seconds). Rebound vertical
jumps from a ground-start position have been performed with single or multiple repetitions,
including the 10-5 repeated jump test (64), which requires 10 maximal vertical rebound jumps
following the ini tial maximum countermo vement jump .
2. All styles of rebound vertical jump should be performed with the athlete attempting to jump
with a short ground contact time while still aiming to jump as high as possible. A short ground
contact time is achiev ed by limiting flexion of the ankles, knees, and hips while in contact with
the gr ound b y adopting high leg sti ffness (high f orce with shal low range of motion).
3. As per the drop jump, the most reported performance variables following rebound vertical
jump testing are jump height , ground contact time, and reactiv e strength index (calculated as
jump height divided by ground contact time). For the 10-5 repeated jump test, the best 5
repetitions in terms of r eactiv e strength index ar e used and a veraged f or the test outcome.
Note:  Descriptiv e data for the rebound jump are presented in table 14.11 near the end of the
chapter .
  12  MARGARIA-KALAMEN TEST
Equipment
Staircase with nine or more steps, each approximately 7 inches (18 cm) high, and a straight
and flat lead-up ar ea 20 f eet (6 m) or mor e in length ( figure 14.13)
Measuring tape or stick
An electr onic timing system wi th both a start and a stop swi tch mechanism
Scale
Personnel
One tester/r ecorder
Procedure
1. The height of each step is measur ed with a ruler or tape measur e, and the elevation from the
third step to the ninth step is calculated (6 × step height).
2. The timer start switch mecha nism is placed on the third step, and the stop switch mechanism
is placed on the ninth step .
3. The athlete to be tested is weighed on a scale, warms up, and practices running up the stairs
three steps at a time.
4. When ready, the athlete sprints toward the stairs from a standing start 20 feet (6 m) from the
base of the stairs and then up the staircase three steps at a time (third step to sixth step to
792
ninth step) as f ast as possible.
5. The time from third- to ninth-step contact is determined to the nearest 0.01 second using the
timing system.
6. Power in watts is calculated as the athlete’ s weight  (w) in newtons (lb × 4.45 or kg × 9.807)
times height  (h) in meters (inches × 0.0254) from the third step to the ninth step divided by
the measur ed time interv al (t) in seconds;  P (watts) = (w × h) / t.
7. Repeat the test two mor e times wi th a 2- to 3-minute r ecovery period between each trial.
Note:  Normativ e data for the Margaria-K alamen test are presented in table 14.12 near the end of
the chapter .
FIGURE 14.13  Mar garia-K alamen stair sprint test.
Reprinted by permission from E. Fox, R. Bowers, and M. Foss, The Physiological Basis for Exercise and Sport, 5th ed. (Brown & Benchmark, 1993), 675, permission
conveyed through Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.
  13  VELOCITY-BASED TESTING (VBT)
Equipment
A commer cial VB T device and the equipment r equired to perf orm the ex ercise in question (e.g. ,
an inertial measur ement unit [IMU], a linear position transducer , a depth-sensing camer a
system, and a computer -vision enabled smartphone appl ication)
An Olympic -style barbel l with weight plates and locking collars; the weight should be
appropriate for the individual athlete being tested (in this case, a 1RM back squat will be the
exercise ev aluated)
Personnel
One tester/r ecorder
Procedure
1. Place the VBT device in a suitable position based on the type of data collection. For example, a
linear position transducer will be placed under the barbel l and tether ed to the barbel l, whereas
an IMU sensor wi ll be af fixed dir ectly to the barbel l.
2. The exercise selected (e.g., bench press, squat, deadl ift) will depend on the needs of the
athlete, individual sport, and training session being performed. In the case of a back squat,
793
follow the technique described in chapter 16 .
3. From the measuring device, obtain the velocity of the barbell typical ly in meters per second,
power measur ed in watts, and peak forces measur ed in newtons. Metrics may vary depending
on the device used for testing or the individual purposes of the tester and athlete. As outlined
earlier in the chapter , VBT data can be used to cr eate a load– velocity profile.
Note:  Descriptiv e data f or VB T are presented in table 14 .13 near the end of the chapter .
Anaerobic Capacity
  14  300-YARD (274 M) SHUTTLE RUN
Equipment
A stopw atch wi th at least 0.1-second r esolution
Two par allel lines 25 y ards (23 m) apart on a flat surf ace (figure 14.14)
Personnel
One timer , two l ine judges
Procedure
1. Pair off athletes of simi lar abi lity.
2. Position two athletes immediately behind one l ine, facing the other l ine.
3. On an auditory signal, the athletes sprint to the line 25 yards (23 m) away, making foot
contact with it, then immediately sprint back to the first line. Six such round trips are made as
fast as possible wi thout stopping (6 × 50 y d = 300 y d [274 m]).
4. On completion of the first trial, record both athletes’ times to the nearest 0.1 second and start
a clock to time a 5-minute rest interv al. As each pair of athletes completes the first trial, they
may walk and str etch but must sta y alert f or the starting time on the second trial.
5. After the r est period, the pair of athletes does another trial.
6. The a verage of two trials is r ecorded to the near est 0.1 second.
Note:  Descriptiv e data for the 300-yard (274 m) shuttle are presented in table 14.14 near the end
of the chapter .
794
FIGURE 14.14  Ground la yout for the 300- yard (274 m) shut tle.
Adapted by permission from G.M. Gillam and M. Marks, “300 Yard Shuttle Run,” National Strength and Conditioning Association Journal 5, no. 5 (1983): 46.
  15  90-SECOND BOX JUMP TEST
Equipment
Stopw atch
A box with the dimensions of 18 inches (46 cm) in height and 30 inches (76 cm) in width
A nonsl ip surf ace on which to perf orm the test in which the athlete can saf ely land and jump
Personnel
One r ecorder/tester
Procedure
1. The purpose of this test is to observ e how many times the athlete can jump over the box in a
left to right fashion over a duration of 90 seconds. The athlete begins on top of the box and
then jumps down laterally to one side before jumping back up to the top of the box again. The
athlete then repeats this procedur e in the opposi te direction. Each time the athlete reaches the
top of the bo x counts as 1 r epetition.
2. The athlete must leave the ground with two feet and touch the top of the box with two feet
before jumping down to the other side. The athlete is not permi tted to step up onto the bo x.
3. This is repeated for as many times as the athlete is able to during the 90-second duration of
the test. The tester should record the number of hops taken with proper form over the course
of the test.
Note:  Descriptiv e data for the 90-second box jump test are presented in table 14.15 near the end
of the chapter .
Local Muscular Endurance
  16  PARTIAL CURL-UP
The partial curl-up test measur es the muscular endur ance of the abdominal muscles. It is favored
over the si t-up test because i t eliminates the use of the hip flex or muscles.
795
Equipment
Metronome
Ruler
Masking tape
Mat
Personnel
One r ecorder/technique judge
Procedure
1. The athlete assumes a supine position on a mat with a 90-degr ee knee angle (figure 14.15a).
The arms are at the sides, resting on the floor, with the fingers touching a 4-inch-long (10 cm)
piece of maskin g tape positioned perpendicular to the fingers. A second piece of masking tape
is situated parallel to the first tape at a distance determined by the age of the athlete (4.7
inches [12 cm] f or those y ounger than 45 and 3.1 inches [8 cm] f or those 45 or older).
2. Set a metronome to 40 beats/min and have the athlete do slow, controlled curl-ups to lift the
shoulder blades off the mat (trunk makes a 30-degr ee angle with the mat; figure 14.15b) in
time with the metronome (20 curl-ups per minute). The upper back must touch the floor
before each curl-up . The athlete should avoid flexing the neck to bring the chin close to the
chest.
3. The athlete perf orms as man y curl-ups as possible wi thout pausing, to a maximum of 75.
Note:  Normativ e data for the partial curl-up are presented in table 14.16 near the end of the
chapter .
FIGURE 14.15  (a) Beginning posi tion and  (b) end posi tion of the partial curl-up test.
  17  PUSH-UP
Equipment
A 4-inch (10 cm)-diameter f oam r oller (for the modi fied push-up)
Personnel
796
One r ecorder/technique judge
Procedures
1. Assume the standar d push-up starting position with the hands shoulder -width apart and
elbows and body straight (figure 14.16a). The bottom position for the standar d push-up is
when the chest makes conta ct with the recorder’s fist held vertical ly against the ground (not
shown in  figure 14.16b).
2. A modified version establ ishes a starting position with the knees rather than the feet
contacting the ground; the knees should be flexed to 90 degrees with the ankles crossed
(figure 14.17a). There is no standar d criterion for the bottom position of the modified push-up
(44), but it has been suggested that the torso should come in contact with a foam roller rather
than a fist ( figure 14.17b).
3. For either v ersion, r epetitions that do not achiev e the bot tom posi tion ar e not counted.
Note:  Normativ e data f or the push-up ar e presented in table 14 .17 near the end of the chapter .
FIGURE 14.16  (a) Beginning posi tion and  (b) down posi tion of the standar d push-up .
FIGURE 14.17  (a) Beginning posi tion and  (b) down posi tion of the modi fied push-up .
18  ARMY FITNESS TEST (AFT) HAND-RELEASE PUSH-UP
(HRP)
Equipment
Level nonsl ip ground or flooring surf ace
Personnel
One r ecorder/technique judge
Procedure
797
1. The starting position of this test will begin with the athlete lying prone on the ground with the
chest, hips, and legs touching the ground (figure 14.18a). Hands are flat on the ground (rather
than what is shown in the photo) with the index fingers inside of the shoulders. The feet
should be no mor e than one boot -width part, and the toes should be touching the gr ound.
2. The tester will begin the test on the command of “Go,” and the athlete must perform as many
push-ups as physical ly able in a 2-minute time period. The athlete should keep a straight line
from the ankles to the head (figure 14.18b). It is not permissible to flex the knees or hips or to
lift the feet off of the ground at any point during the test. After the athlete has fully extended
the arms, he or she should lower the body back to the ground, allowing the chest, hips, and
legs to contact the ground simultaneously . The tester should not count any repetitions in which
a straight al ignment of the body f rom head to f eet is not maintained.
3. At the point at which the athlete’ s body comes back into contact with the ground, two variants
of this test are acceptable: the hand lift and the arm extension. If the hand lift variant is to be
performed, the athlete should  lift both hands so as to create visible space between the palms
and the ground (figure 14.18c). The athlete should then return the hands to the starting
position and begin another repetition. With the arm extension variant, once the athlete’ s body
has returned to the ground, the athlete will then extend the arms fully to form a 90-degr ee
angle between  the arms and the torso (figure 14.18d). The athlete should then return to the
starting posi tion and begin another r epetition.
4. The athlete is not allowed to rest at any time during the test with the exception of the front
rest position, which consists of the top position of the push-up with the arms fully extended
and the body straight. If the tester observ es that the athlete has remained motionless for more
than 5 seconds, the test should be discontinued and the repetitions performed to this point
counted as the athlete’ s score for the test. The test will also be discontinued if the athlete lifts
a foot off of the ground or touches a knee to the ground. Any breakdown in technique such as
flexing the hips or knees should not be counted in the r epetition total.
Note:  AFT normativ e data for the hand-r elease push-up are presented in table 14.18 near the end
of the chapter .
FIGURE 14.18  (a) Beginning position (but with the hands on the ground instead),  (b) up position, (c) hand lift variant, and (d)
arm extension v ariant of the hand-r elease push-up .
798
  19  YMCA BENCH PRESS TEST
Equipment
A barbe ll, weight plates, two safety locks, and enough total weight to assemble an 80-pound
(36 kg) or a 35-pound (16 kg) load (including saf ety locks)
Flat bench pr ess bench (pr eferably wi th an upright r ack to hold the barbel l)
Metronome
Personnel
One spot ter/recorder
Procedure
1. Instruct the athlete in proper technique for the flat barbel l bench press as described in chapter
16.
2. Allow the athlete to perform a specific warm-up of 5 to 10 repetitions with a light to moder ate
load.
3. The spotter/recorder stands at the head end of the bench throughout the test to help raise the
bar on a f ailed at tempt and to help the athlete place the bar back on the r ack.
4. Set the r esistance at 80 pounds (36 kg) f or males and 35 pounds (16 kg) f or females.
5. Set the metronome cadence at 60 beats/min to establ ish a rate of 30 repetitions per minute
(one beat up , one beat down).
6. The athlete grips the bar at shoulder -width, lifts the bar off the rack, and extends the elbows.
Then, in time with the metronome, the athlete repeatedly lowers the bar to the chest and
raises it up again to full elbow extension, until the athlete can no longer keep up with the
metronome. The movement should be smooth and controlled, with the bar reaching its highest
and lowest posi tion wi th each beat of the metr onome.
Note:  Normativ e data for the YMCA  bench press test are presented in table 14.19 near the end of
the chapter .
Aerobic Capacity
  20  1.5-MILE (2.4 KM) RUN
Equipment
Stopw atch
Quarter -mile running track or measur ed and marked 1.5-mi le (2.4 km) flat course with a good
running surf ace
Personnel
One tester to cal l off each athlete’ s time, one r ecorder
Procedure
1. Have each athlete w arm up and str etch bef ore the test.
2. Each athlete should be recognizable to the scorer at the finish line. If that is not possible,
numbers should be pinned to the athletes’ shirts.
3. At the start, al l athletes l ine up behind the starting l ine.
4. Instruct the athletes to complete the run as quickly as possible at a steady pace that they can
barely maintain over the distance. (Note:  Some athletes may have limited experience at pacing
799
long efforts such as this, so some familiarization and prior pacing efforts in training are
suggested. )
5. On an audi tory signal, the athletes start running and co ver the course as quickly as possible.
6. As the athletes cross the finish line, each person’ s time is recorded on a form as a timer calls
off the time in minutes and seconds (00:00).
Note:  Normativ e data for the 1.5-mi le (2.4 km) run are presented in tables 14.22 through 14.25
near the end of the chapter . For each 1.5-mi le (2.4 km) run time, the tables show an estimated
maximal rate of oxygen consumption; the norms for athletes in various sports are shown in table
14.26 near the end of the chapter .
  21  12-MINUTE RUN
Equipment
A 400-meter (437- yard) track or flat looped course wi th a mark er at each 100 meters
Stopw atch
Personnel
One tester to cal l out each athlete’ s posi tion, one r ecorder
Procedure
1. Athletes l ine up at the starting l ine.
2. On an auditory signal, the athletes travel by foot as far as possible in 12 minutes, preferably by
running but, i f necessary , by walking part or al l of the time.
3. At 12 minutes, on an audi tory signal, al l the athletes stop in place.
4. The distance run by each athlete (laps × 400 m—e.g. , 5.25 laps × 400 m = 2,100 m) is
calculated and r ecorded.
Note:  Normativ e data for the 12-minute run are presented in table 14.27 near the end of the
chapter .
22  YO-YO INTERMITTENT RECOVERY TEST
The use of the Yo-Yo intermi ttent recovery tests (IRT1 and IRT2) is now commonplace in field
testing protocols for team sports such as soccer and lacrosse (10, 18, 85). It is suggested that
these tests are more specific to team sports because they mimic the demands of short, intense
bursts of exercise followed by short recovery periods. Both tests consist of 2 × 20-meter (22 yd)
shuttle runs at increasing speeds interspersed with a 10-second period of recovery, with the IRT1
starting at 10 km/h (6.2 mph) and the IRT2 starting at 13 km/h (8.1 mph). It is recommended that
strength and condi tioning pr ofessionals use the IR T1.
Equipment
Cones
A tape measur e at least 30 meters (33 y d) long
Audio softw are specifically for the Yo-Yo intermi ttent recovery test, IRT1 (available from a
variety of commer cial sour ces)
Method of br oadcasting the audio fi les (e.g. , wireless speak ers)
Recording sheet
Flat floor wi th good tr action
Personnel
One tester/r ecorder, one spot ter
800
Procedure
1. Measur e out a 20-meter (22 yd) test course and arrange cones as seen in figure 14.19. Place
markers 2 meters (7 ft) apart at both ends of the test course at the start and turning lines.
Also measur e out a 5-meter (16 ft) distance behind the start l ine.
2. Have the athletes warm up and stretch before the test. The athletes should run the course
with a submaximal ef fort for practice.
3. The test begins wi th the athletes standing at the start l ine.
4. On an auditory signal, the athletes run forward to the turning line. At the sound of the second
signal, athletes arrive at the turning line and then run back to the starting line, arriving in time
with the next sound.
5. When the start marker is passed, the athletes jog toward the 5-meter (16 ft) mark, then turn
back to the start l ine. A t this point the athletes stop and w ait for the next sound.
6. The athletes are required to place one foot on or over the starting or turning line at the sound
of each beep .
7. The athletes continue running for as long as they can maintain the increasing speed as
indicated b y the audi tory signals.
8. The termination of the test is indicated by the inability of an athlete to maintain the required
pace f or two trials. A w arning is giv en the first time the start or turning l ine is not r eached.
9. At the end of the test, record the last level and numbe r of 2 × 20-meter (22 yd) interv als
performed at that lev el on a r ecording sheet.
10. The final Yo-Yo intermi ttent recovery speed and interv al score can be used to calculate the
total distance co vered by the athlete during the test.
Note:  Descriptiv e data for the Yo-Yo intermi ttent recovery test are presented in table 14.28 near the
end of the chapter .
801
FIGURE 14.19  Setup f or the Y o-Yo intermi ttent r ecovery test.
  23  MAXIMAL AEROBIC SPEED TEST
Equipment
Cones
A tape measur e at least 30 meters (33 y d) long
Audio softw are speci fically for the test
Method of br oadcasting the audio fi les (e.g. , wireless speak ers)
Recording sheet
Indoor or outdoor running tr ack (at least 200 m [219 y d])
Personnel
One tester/r ecorder
Procedure
1. Marker cones ar e placed at 25-meter (27 y d) interv als ar ound the running tr ack.
2. The initial speed of the test is set between 8 and 12 km/h (5-7 mph) depending on the fitness
level of the athlete. It is gener ally recommended that athletes start at 10 km/h (6 mph).
3. The speed is then increased by 1 km/h (0.6 mph) every 2 minutes until the athlete cannot
maintain the speed.
802
4. The last speed maintained for at least 2 minutes is consider ed the speed associated with
V̇O2max or MA S.
5. The test is terminated if the athlete fails to reach the next cone on two consecutiv e occasions
in the r equired time.
6. The speed at the last comple ted stage is increased by 0.5 km/h if the athlete is able to run a
half stage.
7. The V̇O2max of the athlete can be calculated by multiplying 3.5 × MAS (speed in km/h) (87,
88).
8. If the tester does not have access to the audio version, it is possible to conduct the test using
a whistle. Calculate the timing of whistles using a set speed for reaching the next cone. For
example, when  the distance between cones is 25 meters, the timing of whistles for 10 km/h
would be ev ery 9 seconds.
Note:  Norms for the V̇O2max of athlete s in various sports are shown in table 14.26 near the end of
the chapter .
  24  30-15 INTERMITTENT FITNESS TEST (IFT)
Equipment
A 40-meter (44 y d) long surf ace that is stable and sui table f or an athlete to run on
Measuring tape
Marking cones
30-15 IFT audio recording and a player suitable for the media type being used that can be
heard across the testing en vironment
Personnel
One r ecorder/tester
Procedure
1. Measur e out and arr ange the cones as shown in figure 14.20 (at lines A, B , and C).
2. Have the athletes warm up before the test by running the course with a submaximal effort for
practice.
3. The test begins wi th the athletes standing at the start l ine (line A).
4. The first interv al begins at a jogging speed of 8.0 km/h (5 mph). The speed is then increased
by 0.5 km/h (0.3 mph) in each subsequent stage.
5. Athletes run using the beeps played from the audio file to maintain their pace. They run
between lines A and C, and they should pass through each 3-meter (10 ft) zone associated
with lines A, B , and C wi th the sound of each beep .
6. A different type of beep indicates when to stop running. At that point the athletes have 15
seconds as a recovery to walk to the next line, where they will wait for the start of the next
interv al.
7. Athletes adv ance stages unti l they cannot r each the r elevant line on thr ee consecutiv e beeps.
8. Record the running speed (km/h) achiev ed during the last completed stage (VIFT). The total
running distance of each interv al is corr ected b y a factor of 0. 7 second per change of dir ection.
Note:  Descriptiv e data for the 30-15 IFT are presented in figure 14.34 (a, females;  b, males) near
the end of the chapter .
803
FIGURE 14.20  30-15 IF T course la yout.
Reprinted by permission from M. Buccheit, “The 30-15 Intermittent Fitness Test: Accuracy for Individualizing Interval Training of Young Intermittent Sport Players,” Journal
of Strength and Conditioning Research 22, no. 2 (2008): 365-374.
Change of Direction or Agility
  25  T-TEST
Equipment
Four cones
A tape measur e at least 5 y ards (4.6 m) long
Stopw atch or timing gates, if available, with correspond ing softw are on a laptop , tablet, or
smartphone appl ication
Flat floor wi th good tr action
Personnel
One tester/r ecorder, one spot ter
Procedure
1. Arrange four cones as shown in figure 14.21 (points A, B, C, and D). Set the timing gates up at
the start and finish l ine.
2. Have the athlete warm up and stretch before the test. The athlete may run the course with a
submaximal ef fort for practice.
3. The test begins wi th the athlete standing at point A.
4. On an auditory signal, the athlete sprints forward to point B and touches the base of the cone
with the right hand.
5. Then, while facing forward and not crossing the feet, the athlete shuffles to the left 5 yards
(4.6 m) and touches the base of the cone at point C wi th the left hand.
6. The athlete then shuffles to the right 10 yards (9 m) and touches the base of the cone at point
D with the right hand.
7. The athlete then shuffles to the left 5 yards (4.6 m) and touches the base of the cone at point
B with the left hand, and next runs backw ard past point A, at which time the w atch is stopped.
8. For safety, a spotter and gym mat should be positioned several feet behind point A to catch an
athlete who f alls whi le running backw ard.
9. The best time of two trials is r ecorded to the near est 0.1 second.
804
10. The following are reasons for disqual ification of a trial: The athlete fails to touch the base of
any cone, crosses one foot in front of the other instead of shuffling the feet, or fails to face
forward for the entir e test.
Note:  Descriptiv e data f or the T -test ar e presented in table 14 .29 near the end of the chapter .
FIGURE 14.21  Floor la yout for the T -test.
Adapted by permission from D. Semenick, “Tests and Measurements: The T-Test,” National Strength and Conditioning Association Journal 12, no. 1 (1990): 36-37.
  26  HEXAGON TEST
Equipment
Adhesiv e tape of a color that contr asts wi th the floor
Measuring tape or stick
Stopw atch
Flat floor wi th good tr action
Personnel
One timer/r ecorder, one l ine judge
Procedure
1. Using the adhesiv e tape, create a hexagon on the floor with 24-inch (61 cm) sides meeting to
form 120-degr ee angles ( figure 14.22).
2. The athlete w arms up and pr actices perf ormance of the test at submaximal speed.
3. The test begins wi th the athlete standing in the middle of the hexagon.
4. On an auditory signal, the athlete begins double-leg hopping from the center of the hexagon
over each side and back to the center , starting with the side directly in front of the athlete, in a
continuous clockwise sequen ce until all six sides are covered three times (three revolutions
around the hexagon for a total of 18 jumps) and the athlete is again standing at the center .
The athlete r emains f acing the same dir ection thr oughout the test.
5. If the athlete lands on a side of the hexagon rather than over it, or loses balance and takes an
extra step or changes the direction in which he or she is facing, the trial is stopped and
restarted after the athlete is al lowed time f or full recovery.
805
6. The best time of thr ee trials is r ecorded to the near est 0.1 second.
Note:  Descriptiv e data for the hexagon test are presented in table 14.29 near the end of the
chapter .
FIGURE 14.22  Layout for the hexagon test.
Adapted by permission from K. Pauole, K. Madole, J. Garhammer, et al., “Reliability and Validity of the T-Test as a Measure of Agility, Leg Power, and Leg Speed in College-
Aged Men and Women,” Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research 14, no. 4 (2000): 443-450.
  27  5-10-5 TEST
This test is also cal led the  pro agility test  or the  20-yard shut tle.
Equipment
An American footbal l field or other field marked with three parallel lines 5 yards (4.6 m) apart
(figure 14.23)
Stopw atch or timing gates, if available, with correspond ing softw are on a laptop , tablet, or
smartphone appl ication
Personnel
One timer/r ecorder, one l ine judge
Procedure
1. If using one timing gate for total end time, set this up at the start and finish line. If multiple
gates are available, set up at the start and finish line as well as at each turn line to measur e
each spl it.
2. The athlete str addles the center l ine using a thr ee-point stance.
3. On an auditory signal, the athlete sprints 5 yards (4.6 m) to the line on the left, then changes
direction and sprints 10 yards (9 m) to the line on the right, then again changes direction and
sprints 5 yards (4.6 m) to the center line. Hand (or foot) contact must be made with all
indicated l ines. ( Note:  It is important that this is k ept consistent f or both trials. )
4. The best time of two trials is r ecorded to the near est 0.01 second.
Note:  Normativ e data for the 5-10-5 test (previously pro agility) are presented in tables 14.29 and
14.30 near the end of the chapter .
806
FIGURE 14.23  Layout for the 5-10-5 test.
  28  5-0-5 TEST
Equipment
Seven cones
Stopw atch or timing gates, if available, with correspond ing softw are on a laptop , tablet, or
smartphone appl ication
Personnel
One timer/r ecorder, one l ine judge
Procedure
1. Arrange the cones as seen in figure 14.24. If timing lights are available, these can also be set
up as shown.
2. Have the athlete warm up and stretch before the test. The athlete may run the course with a
submaximal ef fort for practice.
3. The test begins wi th the athlete standing at the start l ine.
4. On an auditory signal, the athlete sprints forward 10 meters (11 yd) to the first set of timing
lights, then sprints a further 5 meters (5 yd) to the turnin g line (one foot must be on or over
the line), wher e he or she is r equired to turn and ac celerate of f the l ine.
5. The athlete ma y slow down only after passing thr ough the timing l ights f or the second time.
6. The best time of two trials is r ecorded to the near est 0.1 second.
7. The athlete completes the trials turning off the preferred leg. Alternativ ely, trials (at least two)
can be administer ed turning of f either the pr eferred or non-pr eferred leg.
Note:  Descriptiv e data for the 5-0-5 test is presented in tables 14.29 and 14.30 near the end of the
chapter .
807
FIGURE 14.24  Layout for the 5-0-5 test.
29  ILLINOIS TEST
Equipment
Stopw atch or timing l ights
Tape measur e
Eight cones
Personnel
One tester/r ecorder
Procedure
1. Set up the cones on a course  of 10 meters (11 yd) in length by 5 meters (5 yd) in width. Four
cones should be on the corners of the 10-meter × 5-meter squar e, with the additional four
placed in the center of the 5-meter width equal ly spaced along the 10-meter length. This will
create three aisles of cones in the order of two, four, and two through which the athlete will
run (figure 14.25).
2. Instruct the athlete to lie prone at the cone to the outside left of the full 10-meter length. The
athlete will be instructed to get up and run when the tester says “Go,” sprint to the cone 10
meters ahead, and then turn ar ound to sprint back to the cones in the middle aisle.
808
3. The athlete then slaloms through the four cones in the center aisle in both directions before
then running to the cone at the opposi te end of the thir d aisle.
4. The athlete sprints the 10 meters of the thir d aisle to complete the test.
5. The tester will stop the timer once the athlete has completed the third aisle of cones and
record the time.
6. Note:  Normativ e data for the Illinois test are presented tables 14.31 and 14.32 near the end of
the chapter .
FIGURE 14.25  Layout for the Il linois test.
Reprinted by permission from R. Lockie, “Testing, Assessment, and Monitoring of Agility and Quickness,” in Developing Agility and Quickness, 2nd ed., edited for the
National Strength and Conditioning Association by J. Dawes (Human Kinetics, 2019), 93.
Speed
  30  STRAIGHT-LINE SPRINT TESTS
Equipment
Stopw atch or timing gates, if available, with correspond ing softw are on a laptop , tablet, or
smartphone appl ication
809
Flat running surface with start and finish lines a specified distance apart (e.g., 40 yd [37 m];
10 m, 20 m, 40 m), wi th at least 20 y ards (18 m) after the finish l ine for deceler ation
Where multiple timing gates are available, set these up to determine additional split times, in
addition to the start and finish lines (e.g., start line, 10 yd [9 m], 20 yd [18 m], finish line at 40
yd [37 m]). This enables greater insight into acceleration capaci ties in addition to the maximal
speed.
Personnel
One timer/r ecorder
Procedure
1. Have the athlete w arm up and dynamical ly stretch f or sev eral minutes.
2. Allow at least two pr actice runs at submaximal speed.
3. The athlete assumes a starting posi tion using a thr ee- or f our-point stance.
4. On an audi tory signal, the athlete sprints the speci fied distance at maximal speed.
5. The best spl it times of two trials ar e recorded to the near est 0.1 second.
6. Allow at least 2 minutes of activ e recovery or r est between trials.
Note:  Normativ e data for the 10-meter (11 yd), 20-meter (22 yd), 40-meter (44 yd), and 40-yard
(37 m) sprint ar e presented in table 14 .33 near the end of the chapter .
Balance and Stability
  31  BALANCE ERROR SCORING SYSTEM (BESS)
Equipment
Foam balance pad
Stopw atch
Personnel
One timer/r ecorder
Procedure
1. The six posi tions of the BES S are shown in figure 14.26.
2. The three stance positions are double-leg stance with feet together , single-leg stance on the
nondominant foot with contralater al leg in approximately  90 degrees of flexion, and tandem
stance with the dominant foot in front of the nondominant foot (128). The test is conducted on
a firm surf ace and on a soft surf ace.
3. The stances ar e held f or 20 seconds wi th eyes closed and hands on hips f or each condi tion.
4. Athletes are told to keep as steady as possible, and if they lose balance, they attempt to regain
their ini tial posi tion as quickly as possible.
5. Errors include opening eyes; lifting the hands from the hips; touchdown of nonstance foot;
step, hop, or other movement of the stance foot or feet; lifting the forefeet or heel; moving
the hip into more than 30 degrees of hip flexion or abduc tion; or remaining out of position for
more than 5 seconds.
6. The err or scor es from the BES S test ar e summed into a single scor e.
Note:  Normativ e data f or the BES S are presented in table 14 .34 near the end of the chapter .
810
FIGURE 14.26  Balance err or scoring system (BES S): (a-c) firm surf ace condi tion and  (d-f) soft surf ace condi tion.
32  STAR EXCURSION BALANCE TEST (SEBT)
Equipment
Adhesiv e tape
Personnel
One r ecorder
Procedure
1. The athlete stands in the center of a grid with eight lines (120 cm [47 in.]) extending out at
45-degr ee incr ements as shown in figure 14.27 (115, 126).
2. The athlete maintains a single-leg stance facing in one direction while reaching with the
contralater al leg as far as possible for each taped line, touching the farthest point possible and
811
then returning  to the bilateral position. Within a single trial, the athlete remains facing in the
beginning direction and the stance leg remains the same, with the other leg doing all of the
reaching.
3. The distance f rom the center of the star to the touch posi tion is measur ed.
4. The starting direction and support leg are chosen randomly . Three trials are performed for
each condi tion and a veraged.
5. A 15-second r est is al lowed between each r each.
6. Trials are discarded if the athlete does not touch the line, lifts the stance foot from the center
grid, loses balance, or does not maintain start and r eturn posi tions f or 1 f ull second.
7. Athletes should be giv en a minimum of f our pr actice trials bef ore being tested (103).
8. It has been suggested that testing the anteromedial, medial, and poster omedial positions is
sufficient f or most si tuations (66).
Note:  Normativ e data for the star excursion balance test are presented in tables 14.20 and 14.21
near the end of the chapter .
FIGURE 14.27  Directions f or the star ex cursion balance test (SEB T).
Reprinted by permission from M.P. Reiman and R.C. Manske, Functional Testing in Human Performance (Human Kinetics, 2009), 109.
Flexibility
  33  SIT-AND-REACH TEST
Note:  A consistent method for the sit-and-r each test should be maintained if the test is done
periodical ly. For example, if the test is performed with a measuring tape or stick during initial
testing of the athlete, all subsequent testing of the athlete should be performed with a measuring
tape or stick (i.e. , a sit-and-r each bo x should not be used instead).
Equipment
Measuring tape or stick
Adhesiv e tape
Permissible al ternativ e: a standar d sit-and-r each bo x
Personnel
One tester/r ecorder
812
Procedure
1. Tape the measuring stick or tape measur e to the floor. Place one piece of tape about 24 inches
(61 cm) long acr oss the measuring stick and at a right angle to i t at the 15-inch (38 cm) mark.
2. Have the athlete warm up with nonbal listic exercises involving the hamstrings and lower back
(e.g., by walking rapidly for 3-5 min); performing several repetitions of flexing forward from a
standing, knees-extended position, reaching toward the toes, then reaching upward toward the
ceiling (all without jerking); jogging in place while trying to kick the heels into the upper thighs
from behind; and finishing wi th standing toe-touching or simi lar str etching on the floor .
3. Have the athlete sit shoeless with the measuring stick between the legs with its zero end
toward the body, the feet 12 inches (30 cm) apart, the toes pointed upward, and the heels
nearly touching the edge of the taped l ine at the 15-inch (38 cm) mark ( figure 14.28a).
4. The athlete slowly reaches forward with both hands as far as possible on the measuring stick,
holding this position moment arily. To get the best stretch, the athlete should exhale and drop
the head between the arms when reaching. Be sure the athlete keeps the hands adjacent to
each other and does not lead with one hand. The fingertips should remain in contact with the
measuring stick (figure 14.28b). The tester may hold the athlete’ s knees down, if necess ary, to
keep them straight. A score of less than 15 inches indicates that the athlete could not reach
the bot tom of the f eet.
5. The best of thr ee trials is r ecorded to the near est 0.25 inch or 1 centimeter .
Note:  Normativ e data for the sit-and-r each test are presented in tables 14.22 through 14.25 near
the end of the chapter .
FIGURE 14.28  (a) Starting posi tion and  (b) final posi tion of the si t-and-r each test.
34  OVERHEAD SQUAT
Equipment
Wooden dowel or barbel l
Personnel
One tester/r ecorder
Procedure
813
1. The athlete holds the wooden dowel overhead with the shoulders fully flexed and with elbows
locked. The grip should be twice shoulder -width using biacromial width as the reference
measur ement point for shoulder width. Biacromial width is the distance between the widest
bony points at the superior portion of both shoulders. The feet are approximately shoulder -
width apart, wi th toes pointing f orward or sl ightly out ( figure 14.29a).
2. The athlete then squats down; the initial action is flexion of the hips and knees. The heels
remain in contact wi th the floor at al l times.
3. The lowering continues unti l the cr ease of the hips is below the top of the knee.
4. The athlete should be able to hold this position with the torso remaining upright (parallel to
the tibia) and the wooden dowel (or barbel l) comf ortably o verhead ( figure 14.29b).
5. The athlete performs a minimum of 5 repetitions, and the tester views the movement from the
side.
6. The assessment is qualitative and the goal is to assess the movement competency , with the
movement scor ed as pass/f ail.
7. It is important that the athlete be warmed up and familiarized with the movement patterns to
increase the test v alidity.
FIGURE 14.29  (a) Starting posi tion and  (b) squat posi tion for the o verhead squat.
Body Composition
814
  35  SKINFOLD MEASUREMENTS
Equipment
Skinfold cal ipers
Flexible tape measur e
Marking pen
Personnel
One tester , one r ecorder
Procedure (Obtaining a Skinfold Measurement)
1. Skinfold measur ements should be made on dry skin, before exercise, to ensur e maximum
validity and reliability (70). The number of sites and equat ions should be selected based on the
population tested (see table 14 .35 near the end of the chapter).
2. Grasp the skin firmly with the thumb and index finger to form a fold of skin and subcutaneous
fat.
3. Place the caliper prongs perpendicular to the fold 0.5 inch to 1 inch (appr oximately 1-2 cm)
from the thumb and index finger .
4. Release the cal iper grip so that i ts spring tension is ex erted on the skinf old.
5. Between 1 and 2 seconds after the grip on the caliper has been released, read the dial on the
caliper to the near est 0.5 mi llimeter .
6. Obtain one measur ement from each test site, and then repeat all test sites for a second trial. If
the measur ements do not differ by more than 10%, average the two measur ements to the
nearest 0.5 millimeter . Other wise, take one or more additional measur ements until two of the
measur ements are within 10%, and average those two measur ements to the nearest 0.5
millimeter .
Procedure (Measuring the Selected Site and Calculating the Body Fat Percentage)
1. There are specific equations for estimating body density (Db) (then, in turn, percent body fat
[%BF]) for different populations. First, select the equation appropriate for the athlete from
table 14 .35 near the end of the chapter .
2. Refer to the chosen equation and related instructions and mark the skin at the appropriate
anatomical si tes (69, 120):
Chest —a diagonal fold one-hal f the distance between the anterior axillary line and the
nipple f or men ( figure 14.30a)
Thigh —a vertical fold on the anterior aspect of the thigh, midw ay between the hip and
knee joints ( figure 14.30b)
Abdomen —a vertical fold 1 inch (2.5 cm) to the right (relative to the athlete) of the
umbilicus ( figure 14.30c)
Triceps —a vertical fold on the poste rior midline of the upper arm (over the triceps muscle),
halfway betwe en the acromion and the olecranon processes (the arm should be in
anatomical posi tion wi th the elbow extended and r elaxed [figure 14.30d])
Suprailium—a diagonal fold above the crest of the ilium at the spot where an imaginary line
would come down from the anterior axillary line (figure 14.30e) (some  prefer the measur e
to be tak en mor e later ally, at the midaxi llary line)
Midaxi lla—a vertical fold on the midaxi llary line at the level of the xiphoid process of the
sternum ( figure 14.30f)
Subscapula —a fold taken on a diagonal line that extends from the vertebr al border to a
point 0.5 inch to 1 inch (1 to 2 cm) f rom the inf erior angle of the scapula ( figure 14.30g)
815
Calf—a vertical fold along the medial side of the calf, at the level of maximum calf
circumference ( figure 14.30h)
3. Using the appropriate popula tion-speci fic equation from table 14.35, calculate the estimated
body densi ty from the skinf olds (61).
4. Enter the body density into the appropriate population-speci fic equation from table 14.36 near
the end of the chapter to calculate the per cent body f at from the body densi ty (69).
5. Note that there are no universally accepted norms for body composi tion. When strength and
condi tioning professionals assess an athlete’ s body composition, they must account for a
standar d error of the estimate (SEE) and report a range of percentages that the athlete falls
into. Note that the minimum SEE for population-speci fic skinfold equations is ±3% to ±5%.
Therefore, if a 25-year-old male athlete’ s body fat is measur ed at 24%, there is a minimum of
a 6% r ange (21%-27%).
Note:  Descriptiv e data for percent body fat are presented in tables 14.22 through 14.25 and table
14.37 near the end of the chapter .
FIGURE 14.30 a Chest skinf old.
816
FIGURE 14.30 b Thigh skinf old.
FIGURE 14.30 c Abdomen skinf old.
817
FIGURE 14.30 d Triceps skinf old.
FIGURE 14.30 e Supr ailium skinf old.
818
FIGURE 14.30 f Midaxi lla skinf old.
FIGURE 14.30 g Subscapula skinf old.
819
FIGURE 14.30 h Cal f skinf old.
36  BIOELECTRICAL IMPEDANCE (BIA)
Equipment
BIA device
Personnel
One r ecorder
Procedure
1. Program the device wi th the athlete’ s sex, weight, and height.
2. Have the athlete either hold the electr odes in the hands or stand barefoot on the electr odes
depending on the t ype of device.
3. Press the start button and wait the specified duration of time for that device (usual ly under 5
seconds).
4. From the measuring device, obtain and r ecord the body composi tion measur ements pr ovided.
5. This means of evaluating body composi tion is best done under similar circumstances. To most
effectively monitor body composi tion changes, it is recommended that testing be done first
thing in the morning before the athlete has exercised, before food or water consumption, and
after ha ving v oided.
Note:  Descriptiv e data for percent body fat are presented in tables 14.22 through 14.25 and table
14.37 near the end of the chapter .
Anthropometry
820
  37  GIRTH MEASUREMENTS
Equipment
Flexible, spring-loaded tape measur e (e.g. , a Gul ick tape)
Personnel
One tester , one r ecorder
Procedure
1. Position the athlete in a relaxed anatomical position for each measur ement (unless otherwise
indicated f or a particular measur ement).
2. Measur e the f ollowing si tes (81); see figure 14.31:
Chest —at nipple level in males and at maximum circumference (above the breasts) in
females
Right upper arm—at the point of maximal circumference with the elbow fully extended,
palm up , and arm abducted to par allel with the floor
Right forearm—at the point of maximal circumference with the elbow fully extended, palm
up, and arm abducted to par allel with the floor
Waist (abdomen) —at the lev el of the umbi licus
Hips (but tocks) —at the maximal pr otrusion of the but tocks wi th the heels together
Right thigh —at the point of maximal cir cumference, usual ly just below the but tocks
Right cal f—at the point of maximal cir cumference between the knee and ankle
FIGURE 14.31  Sites for girth measur ements.
821
Statistical Evaluation of Test Data
Once the pr oper test or tests ha ve been chosen and administer ed and the scor es col lected, the next
step may include any or all of the following: (1) analysis  of the data to determine the change in
performance of the individuals or group over the training period (weeks, months, or years); (2)
analysis of the individual or group’s performance relative to that of similar individuals or groups
tested in the past; (3) analysis of the relationship of each athlete’ s scores to those of the group;
and (4) comparison of individual scor es to local, state, national, or international norms.
An important outcome of repeated performance testing is evaluation of both the improvement of
individual athletes and the overall effectiveness of the physical condi tioning program as determined
by changes in test scores (103). A difference score  is the difference between an athlete’ s score at
the beginning and end of a training period or between any two separ ate testing times. The
percent chan ge is another measure that can be used. Howev er, evaluating the effectiveness of a
training program merely by degree of improvement has two major limitations. First, athletes who
begin the training period at a higher training status will not improve as much as untrained athletes
who perform poorly at the beginning of training (i.e., the principle of diminishing returns ). The
window of adaptation for the various physical capaci ties is typical ly greater for less well-trained
athletes as well as measur es of aerobic fitness (109). Second, athletes may deliberately fail to give
maximal effort on pretraining tests to inflate their pre- to posttraining improvement scores. It is
important to encour age athletes to giv e maximal ef fort on both the pr e- and post training tests.
Types of Statistics
Statistics  is the science of collecting, classifying, analyzing, and interpreting numerical data (27,
145). A working knowledge of statistics is helpful in making sound evaluations of test results.
Within statistics are different branches such as descriptiv e and inferential. Over the years, scientists
and practitioners in strength  and condi tioning have made increasing use of magni tude-based
approaches (through calculation of the effect size), which can be more meaningf ul because they
provide information regarding the magni tude of change that is practical ly meaningf ul to the athlete
in a giv en sport.
Descriptive Statistics
Descriptive statistics  summariz es or describes a large group of data. It is used when all the
information about a population is known. For example, if all the members of a team are tested,
statements can be made about the team with the use of descriptiv e statistics. There are three
categories of numerical measurement in descriptiv e statistics: central tendency , variabi lity, and
percentile rank. In the sections that follow, these terms are defined, and examples of how to
calculate the v alues and scor es are presented.
Central Tend ency  Measur es of central tende ncy are values about which the data tend to
cluster . The thr ee most common measur es of centr al tendency (27 , 145) ar e as f ollows:
Mean —the average of the scores (i.e., the sum of the scores divided by the number of scores).
This is the most commonly used measur e of centr al tendency .
Median —the middlemost score when  a set of scores is arranged in order of magni tude. With an
even number of scores, the median is the average of the two middlemost scores. Half a group of
scores falls above the median  and half falls below the median. Depending on the distribution of
scores, the median can be a better measur e of central tendency than the mean. This is
particularly true when very high or very low scores of one or a few members of the group tested
raise or lower the group mean to the extent that it does not adequately describe the ability of
most gr oup members.
822
Mode —the score that occurs with the greatest frequency . If each numerical score appears only
once, there is no mode. If two or more scores are tied for greatest frequency , all of the similar
scores are modes. The mode is gener ally regarded as the least useful measur e of central
tendency .
Variability  The degree of dispersion of scores within a group is called variability . Two common
measur es of variabi lity are the range  and the standard deviation . The range is the interv al from
the lowest to the highest score. The advantage of the range is that it is easy to understand; the
disadv antage is that it uses only the two extreme scores and so may not be an accurate measur e of
variabi lity (145). For example, the range could be the same for a group of widely dispersed scores
as for a group of scores that are narrowly dispersed except for one deviant score. The standar d
deviation is a measur e of the variabi lity of a set of scores about the mean. The formula for the
standar d deviation of a sample is as f ollows:
SD=∑(x−x¯)2n−1  (14 .1)
where Σ refers to a summation, x is a score, x is the mean of the scores, and n is the sample size
(number of scores). A relatively small standar d deviation  indicates that a set of scores is closely
cluster ed about the mean; a large standar d deviation indicates wider dispersion of the scores about
the mean. The standar d deviation is most useful when the group of scores is “normal ly distributed, ”
forming the bel l-shaped curv e shown in figure 14.32 (26, 67).
The z-score can be used to express the distance of any individual score in standar d deviation
(SD) uni ts from the mean:
  z = (x −  x) / SD    (14.2)
For example, if an athlete runs the 40-yard (37 m) sprint in 4.6 seconds and the mean and
standar d deviation for the group tested are 5.00 and 0.33 seconds, respectiv ely, equation 14.2 can
be applied to determine that the z-score for that athlete is −1.2. In other words, the athlete’ s score
is 1.2 standar d deviation units below (i.e., faster than) the group mean. Graphs can be a useful way
of representing z-scores visual ly. This can provide the strength and condi tioning professional with a
comparison of different physical capaci ties and provide assistance with making decisions on which
weaknesses to target with a training program. In the example shown, the strength and condi tioning
professional may decide to focus on improving endur ance and flexibi lity while also improving body
composi tion ( figure 14.33).
FIGURE 14.32  Normal bel l curv e.
823
FIGURE 14.33 Z-score column chart representing standar dized test scores across different fitness tests for an individual athlete.
The z ero represents the team a verage.
Percentile Rank An individual’ s percentile rank is the percentage of test takers scoring below
that individual . As in calculation of the median, percentile ranking requires arranging scores
ordinally (lowest to highest). For example, if an athlete is ranked in the 75th percentile, 75% of the
group produced scores below  that athlete’ s score. Norms based on large samples are sometimes
expressed in evenly spaced percentiles. Several examples of percentile rank tables are shown in the
tables near the end of the chapter .
Inferential Versus Magnitude Statistics
The use of inferential statistics  allows one to draw gener al conclusions about a population from
information collected in a population sample. For examp le, if a boys’ 9th-gr ade gym class is put
through a battery of tests and it is assumed that the class (sample) is representativ e of all the 9th-
grade boys in the school (the population), the results of these tests can be used to make inferences
about the population as a whole. A basic assumption of inferential statistics is that the sample is
truly r epresentativ e of the population (27).
Magnitude statistics  can provide a more useful approach for practitioners because it allows for
interpr etation of the clinical significance of fitness testing (75). To describe and evaluate the
magni tude of change in a fitness test, measur es such as smallest worth while change and effect size
are important.
Smallest worthwhile change  refers to the ability of a test to detect the smallest practically
important change in performance. The ability to track changes with a fitness test depends on the
validity and reliability of that test. The smallest worth while change can be determined in a number
of ways, but it is typical ly calculated as 0.2 of the between-subjects standar d deviation (75). For
example, if the standar d deviation for a vertical jump test is 10 centimeters in a group of female
athletes, this would mean that the smallest worth while change for this group of athletes is 2
centimeters (0.2 × 10 cm).
824
Effect size is a statistic that can be useful for calculating group performance following a training
program or comparing betwe en groups of athletes (42). The effect of the training program can be
calculated as the difference or change in the mean score as a proportion of the pretest standar d
deviation (equation 14 .3).
ES = (x posttest − x pretest) / SD pretest    (14.3)
For example, a group of athletes had a pretraining mean bench press 1RM of 104.5 kilograms
(standar d deviation of 5.7 kg), and after a 12-week training interv ention the mean bench press is
111.7 kilograms. The calculated ef fect siz e would be equal to (111. 7 − 104 .5) / 5. 7 = 1.26.
Several scales have been provided to compar e the magni tude of the effect (28, 103, 127), but
reference values for small (0.2), moder ate (0.6), large (1.2), and very large (2.0) can be a useful
starting point for practitioners (42, 75). For the example just given, this would mean that the
strength and condi tioning professional would interpr et the effect size of 1.26 as meaning that the
training pr ogram had a lar ge effect.
Developing an Athletic Profile
To determine the sport-speci fic training status of an athlete, the strength and condi tioning
professional can combine the results of selected tests to gener ate an athletic profile , which is a
group of test results related to sport-speci fic abilities that are important for quality performance in a
sport or sport position. When evaluating athletes, the strength and condi tioning professional should
follow these six steps:
1. Select tests that will measur e the specific parameters most closely related to the physical
characteristics of the sport or sports in question. For example, a testing battery for wrestlers
should include tests f or pul ling str ength, pushing str ength, and local muscular endur ance.
2. Choose valid and reliable tests to measur e these parameters, and arrange the testing battery
in an appropriate order with sufficient rest between tests to promote test reliability (see
chapter 13 for more detail). For exampl e, appropriate tests for wrestling might include push-
ups and sit-ups for maximum  repetitions in a given time interv al. These two tests should be
separ ated by at least 10 minutes of rest to allow recovery from fatigue and thus promote
accurate scor es.
3. Administer the test bat tery wi th as man y athletes as possible.
4. Determine the smallest worth while change for the tests and compar e to normativ e data
where appropriate. It is recommended that coaches store testing results and develop their
own norms when standar dized procedur es are used.
5. Conduct repeat testing (e.g., pre- and posttraining program) and use the results to present a
visual pr ofile with figur es.
6. Use the results of the testin g in some meaningf ul way. Ideally, the results will enable the
strength and condi tioning professional to identi fy the strengths and weaknesses of the
athletes and to design the tr aining pr ogram wi th these in mind.
825
Conclusion
Motor abilities and body composi tion variables that can be improved through strength and
condi tioning programs include maximum muscular strength, maximum muscular power , anaer obic
capaci ty, local muscular endur ance, aerobic capaci ty, agility, speed, flexibi lity, girths, percent body
fat, and lean body mass. Performance testing can be used to evaluate basic motor abilities as well
as the improvement of individual athletes over time and the overall effectiveness of a physical
condi tioning program. Numer ous tests are available to measur e sport-speci fic physical capabi lities
and training status. Strength and condi tioning professionals can either use existing normativ e data
to evaluate athletic performance or develop their own normativ e data. Statistical measur es of
central tendency , variabi lity, percentile rank, smallest worthwhile change, effect size, and standar d
scores are useful for evaluating physical abilities and the improvement of a group as well as the
individuals wi thin the gr oup.
KEY TERMS
aerobic capaci ty
aerobic power
agility
anaer obic capaci ty
anaer obic power
anthropometry
artificial intel ligence (AI)
athletic motor ski ll competencies (AMSC)
athletic perf ormance
athletic pr ofile
balance
body composi tion
central tendency
descriptiv e statistics
difference scor e
effect siz e
flexibi lity
functional mo vement scr een (FMS)
high-speed muscular str ength
inferential statistics
local muscular endur ance
low-speed muscular str ength
machine learning (ML)
magni tude statistics
maximal anaer obic muscular power
mean
median
mode
percent change
percentile rank
principle of diminishing r eturns
procedur es
protocols
826
range
reactiv e strength index
smallest worth while change
speed
stability
standar d deviation
statistics
variabi lity
STUDY QUESTIONS
  1.  The maxim al rate of energy production by the combined phosphagen and glycolytic energy
system is known as
  a.  agi lity
  b.  anaer obic capaci ty
  c.  aer obic capaci ty
  d.  maximal str ength
  2.  One of the f ollowing tests is not a test of agi lity or change of dir ection.
  a.  hexagon test
  b.  5-10-5 (pr o agility) test
  c.  T-test
  d.  reactiv e strength index
  3.  Which of the f ollowing is a disqual ification f or the Nor dic hamstring test?
  a.  al lowing hip flexion r ather than maintaining a str aight l ine from the knees to the head
  b.  going too slow
  c.  al lowing the ankles alone to contact the hooks when the athlete is using a dynamometer
  d.  maintaining tight cor e contr ol
  4.  With an even number of scores, the ___________  is the average of the two middlemost
scores. Hal f a gr oup of scor es falls abo ve this, and hal f falls below .
  a.  median
  b.  mode
  c.  average
  d.  variabi lity
  5.  Which of the f ollowing tests is a measur ement of anthr opometry?
  a.  girth measur ements
  b.  body composi tion
  c.  isometric mid-thigh pul l
  d.  1RM power clean
TABLE 14.1  Percentile Values of the 1RM Bench Press, Squat, and Power
Clean in NCAA Division I Female Collegiate Athletes
Percentile*1RM bench press 1RM squat 1RM power clean 1RM bench press 1RM squat
lb kg lb kg lb kg lb kg lb kg
BASKETBALL SWIMMING
*Descriptors for percentiles: 90 = well above average; 70 = above average; 50 = average; 30 = below average; 10 = well below
average
lb = pounds, SD = standar d deviation,  n = sample siz e
Adapted b y permission f rom J. Hoffman, Norms f or Fitness, P erformance, and Heal th (Human Kinetics, 2006), 36-38, 55-58, 113.
827
90 124 56 178 81 130 59 116 53 145 66
80 119 54 160 73 124 56 109 50 135 61
70 115 52 147 67 117 53 106 48 129 59
60 112 51 135 61 112 51 101 46 120 55
50 106 48 129 59 110 50 97 44 116 53
40 102 46 115 52 103 47 94 43 112 51
30 96 44 112 51 96 44 93 42 104 47
20 88 40 101 46 88 40 88 40 101 46
10 82 37 81 37 77 35 78 35 97 44
Mean 105 48 130 59 106 48 98 45 118 54
SD 18 8 42 19 20 9 15 7 19 9
n 120 86 85 42 35
Percentile* SOFTBALL VOLLEYBALL
90 117 53 184 84 122 55 113 51 185 84
80 108 49 170 77 115 52 108 49 171 78
70 104 47 148 67 106 48 104 47 165 75
60 99 45 139 63 100 45 100 45 153 70
50 95 43 126 57 94 43 98 45 143 65
40 90 41 120 55 93 42 96 44 136 62
30 85 39 112 51 88 40 90 41 126 57
20 80 36 94 43 80 36 85 39 112 51
10 69 31 76 35 71 32 79 36 98 45
Mean 94 43 130 59 97 44 97 44 144 65
SD 18 8 42 19 20 9 14 6 33 15
n 105 97 80 67 62
*Descriptors for percentiles: 90 = well above average; 70 = above average; 50 = average; 30 = below average; 10 = well below
average
lb = pounds, SD = standar d deviation,  n = sample siz e
Adapted b y permission f rom J. Hoffman, Norms f or Fitness, P erformance, and Heal th (Human Kinetics, 2006), 36-38, 55-58, 113.
TABLE 14.2  Percentile Values of the 1RM Bench Press, Squat, and Power
Clean in High School and College American Football Players
Percentile*1RM bench press 1RM squat1RM power
clean 1RM bench press 1RM squat1RM power
clean
lb kg lb kg lb kg lb kg lb kg lb kg
HIGH SCHOOL 14-15 YEARS HIGH SCHOOL 16-18 YEARS
90 243 110 385 175 213 97 275 125 465 211 250 114
*Descriptors for percentiles: 90 = well above average; 70 = above average; 50 = average; 30 = below average; 10 = well
below a verage
**Hof fman 2006 r eported 365 lb (166 kg) f or the 40% r ank of the NCAA DIII 1RM squat.
lb = pounds, SD = standar d deviation,  n = sample siz e.
Adapted by permission from J. Hoffman, Norms for Fitness, Performance, and Health (Human Kinetics, 2006), 36-38, 55-
58, 113.
828
80 210 95 344 156 195 89 250 114 425 193 235 107
70 195 89 325 148 190 86 235 107 405 184 225 102
60 185 84 305 139 183 83 225 102 365 166 223 101
50 170 77 295 134 173 79 215 98 335 152 208 95
40 165 75 275 125 165 75 205 93 315 143 200 91
30 155 70 255 116 161 73 195 89 295 134 183 83
20 145 66 236 107 153 70 175 80 275 125 165 75
10 125 57 205 93 141 64 160 73 250 114 145 66
Mean 179 81 294 134 176 80 214 97 348 158 204 93
SD 45 20 73 33 32 15 44 20 88 40 43 20
n 214 170 180 339 249 284
Percentile* NCAA DI NCAA DIII
90 370 168 500 227 300 136 365 166 470 214
80 345 157 455 207 280 127 325 148 425 193
70 325 148 430 195 270 123 307 140 405 184
60 315 143 405 184 261 119 295 134 385 175
50 300 136 395 180 252 115 280 127 365 166
40 285 130 375 170 242 110 273 124 350** 159**
30 270 123 355 161 232 105 255 116 335 152
20 255 116 330 150 220 100 245 111 315 143
10 240 109 300 136 205 93 225 102 283 129
Mean 301 137 395 180 252 115 287 130 375 170
SD 53 24 77 35 38 17 57 26 75 34
n 1,189 1,074 1,017 591 588
*Descriptors for percentiles: 90 = well above average; 70 = above average; 50 = average; 30 = below average; 10 = well
below a verage
**Hof fman 2006 r eported 365 lb (166 kg) f or the 40% r ank of the NCAA DIII 1RM squat.
lb = pounds, SD = standar d deviation,  n = sample siz e.
Adapted by permission from J. Hoffman, Norms for Fitness, Performance, and Health (Human Kinetics, 2006), 36-38, 55-
58, 113.
TABLE 14.3  Percentile Values of the 1RM Bench Press, Squat, and Power
Clean in NCAA Division I Male Baseball and Basketball Athletes
Percentile*1RM bench press 1RM squat 1RM power clean 1RM bench press 1RM squat1RM power
clean
lb kg lb kg lb kg lb kg lb kg lb kg
BASEBALL BASKETBALL
90 273 124 365 166 265 120 269 122 315 143 250 114
*Descriptors for percentiles: 90 = well above average; 70 = above average; 50 = average; 30 = below average; 10 = well
below a verage
lb = pounds, SD = standar d deviation,  n = sample siz e.
Adapted by permission from J. Hoffman, Norms for Fitness, Performance, and Health (Human Kinetics, 2006), 36-38, 55-
58, 113.
829
80 260 118 324 147 239 109 250 114 305 139 235 107
70 247 112 310 141 225 102 240 109 295 134 230 105
60 239 109 293 133 216 98 230 105 280 127 220 100
50 225 102 270 123 206 94 225 102 265 120 215 98
40 218 99 265 120 200 91 216 98 245 111 205 93
30 203 92 247 112 190 86 210 95 225 102 195 89
20 194 88 237 107 182 83 195 89 195 89 180 82
10 175 80 218 99 162 74 185 84 166 75 162 74
Mean 227 103 281 128 210 95 225 102 251 114 209 95
SD 41 19 57 26 36 16 33 15 57 26 34 15
n 170 176 149 142 131 122
*Descriptors for percentiles: 90 = well above average; 70 = above average; 50 = average; 30 = below average; 10 = well
below a verage
lb = pounds, SD = standar d deviation,  n = sample siz e.
Adapted by permission from J. Hoffman, Norms for Fitness, Performance, and Health (Human Kinetics, 2006), 36-38, 55-
58, 113.
TABLE 14.4  1RM Squat, Bench Press, Power Clean, and Bench Pull
Descriptive Data* for Various Groups
Group, sport, or positionNumber
of
athletesBody weight Squat Bench press Power clean Bench pull
lb kg lb kg lb kg lb kg lb kg
Group, sport, or positionNumber
of
athletesBody weight Squat Bench press Power clean Bench pull
lb kg lb kg lb kg lb kg lb kg
National rugb y league (7) 20 216.5
± 21.898.2 ±
9.9385.8
± 59.5175.0
± 27.3
State-lev el rugb y league (7) 20 201.2
± 18.591.3 ±
8.4329.8
± 30.9149.6
± 14.3
National rugb y league (8) 21 219.4
± 19.299.5 ±
8.7315.0
± 33.5142.7
± 15.2
State-lev el rugb y league (8) 21 200.0
± 19.690.7 ±
8.9258.8
± 35.9117.4
± 16.3
National rugb y league (5) 6 211.2
± 32.295.8 ±
14.6332.5
± 2.6150.8
± 10. 7
National sai ling—men (119) 11 215.6
± 27.697.8 ±
12.5310.6
± 58.6140.9
± 26.6265.9
± 37.3120.6
± 16.9
National
canoe/r owing/wr estling/judo—
men (129)75 167.6
± 19.476.0 ±
8.8199.0
± 35.990.3 ±
16.3176.8
± 26.080.2 ±
11.8
National bask etball—women
(140)12 166.7
± 32.275.6 ±
14.6173.2
± 6.678.6 ±
3.0
NCAA Division IA col lege
footbal l—men (17)963 310.4 140.8
NCAA Division IA col lege
footbal l—men (17)560 420.6 190.8
*The v alues l isted ar e means ± standar d deviation. The data should be r egarded as only descriptiv e, not normativ e.
830
National softbal l—women (113) 10 158.1
± 24.571.7 ±
11.1183.6
± 22.083.3 ±
10.0
National ice hock ey—women
(123)22 155.2
± 15. 770.4 ±
7.1144.0
± 27.065.3 ±
12.2
National soc cer—men (149) 17 168.7
± 16.876.5 ±
7.6378.5
± 46. 7171.7
± 21.2
National soc cer—men (161) 14 169.5
± 13.976.9 ±
6.3362.9
± 43.9164.6
± 21.8182.3
± 28.282.7 ±
12.8
National soc cer—men (161) 15 169.6
± 16.376.8 ±
7.4297.6
± 35. 7135.0
± 16.2170.0
± 36.477.1 ±
16.5
NCAA Division IA col lege
footbal l—men (114)207 229.2
± 48. 7104.0
± 22.1312.8
± 58.6141.6
± 26.6
NCAA Division IA col lege
footbal l—men (114)88 226.0
± 14.3102.5
± 6.5267.4
±
33.1121.3
± 15.0
NCAA Division IA col lege
footbal l—men (114)86 226.0
± 14.3102.5
± 6.5397.9
± 74.1180.5
± 33.6
National handbal l—women (55) 16 152.7
± 18.169.3 ±
8.2113.8
± 14.851.6 ±
6.7
National handbal l—men (54) 15 207.0
± 37.393.9 ±
16.9235.7
± 25.6106.9
± 11.6
Under 16 rugb y league—men
(149)30 165.8
± 24.575.2 ±
11.1221.3
± 48.3100.4
± 21.9162.9
± 29.173.9 ±
13.2156.3
± 22.370.9 ±
10.1
Under 17 rugb y league—men
(149)48 178.8
± 20. 781.1 ±
9.4269.4
± 41.2122.2
± 18. 7205.7
± 29.593.3 ±
13.4184.1
± 22.583.5 ±
10.2
Under 18 rugb y league—men
(149)55 188.1
± 22.085.3 ±
10.0295.4
± 34.2134.0
± 15.5228.6
± 33. 7103.7
± 15.3200.8
± 22.391.1 ±
10.1
Under 19 rugb y league—men
(149)45 195.8
± 21.888.8 ±
9.9305.1
± 43.2138.4
± 19.6249.8
± 36.2113.3
± 16.4215.2
± 27.397.6 ±
12.4
Under 20 rugb y league—men
(149)26 196.0
± 18. 788.9 ±
8.5318.8
± 48. 7144.6
± 22.1252.0
± 33. 7114.3
± 15.3220.5
± 24.7100.0
± 11.2
NCAA Division III lacr osse—
women (73)11 132.3
± 11.060.0 ±
5.0158.5
± 13.471.9 ±
6.196.8 ±
13.443.9 ±
6.1
National rugb y league f orwards
—men (102)63 271.2
± 26.0123.0
± 11.8
National rugb y league backs—
men (102)55 251.3
± 37.5114.0
± 17.0
National rugb y union—men (30) 30 236.1
± 22.3107.1
± 10.1351.6
± 58.0159.5
± 26.3308.6
± 35.9140.0
± 16.3
National rugb y union— women
(11)15 157.9
± 21.871.6 ±
9.9152.1
± 19.469.0 ±
8.8
*The v alues l isted ar e means ± standar d deviation. The data should be r egarded as only descriptiv e, not normativ e.
TABLE 14.5  Descriptive Data* for Bench Press, Back Squat, Vertical Jump,
and Standing Long Jump in Female NCAA Division III Athletes
Sport Bench press (kg) Back squat (kg) Vertical jump (cm) Standing long jump (cm)
*The v alues l isted ar e means ± standar d deviation. The data should be r egarded as only descriptiv e, not normativ e.
Adapted by permission from B. Guthrie, J.B. Fields, B. Thompson, and M.T. Jone, “Physical Performance Assessments of Strength
and P ower in W omen Col legiate A thletes, ” International Journal of Ex ercise S cience  14, no. 6 (2021): 984-993.
831
Field hock ey 43.9 ± 7 .4 78.4 ± 16.44 44.1 ± 6.5 174.4 ± 16.5
Softbal l 46.1 ± 9.5 83.8 ± 17 .9 52.5 ± 4 .5 191.4 ± 11.9
Soccer 42.9 ± 7 .9 72.5 ± 13.9 46.2 ± 6.3 178.1 ± 16.5
Volleybal l 42.7 ± 7 .5 76.1 ± 14 .0 50.8 ± 7 .2 N/A
*The v alues l isted ar e means ± standar d deviation. The data should be r egarded as only descriptiv e, not normativ e.
Adapted by permission from B. Guthrie, J.B. Fields, B. Thompson, and M.T. Jone, “Physical Performance Assessments of Strength
and P ower in W omen Col legiate A thletes, ” International Journal of Ex ercise S cience  14, no. 6 (2021): 984-993.
TABLE 14.6  Descriptive Percentile Values for Isometric Mid-Thigh Pull Peak
Force, Relative Peak Force, and Rate of Force Development for Male Senior
and Junior Soccer Players of National and Regional Standard
Percentile Age group Level of competitionPeak forceRelative peak
forceRate of force development (0-
250 ms)
(N) (N/kg) (N/s)
100 Senior National ( n = 25) 3,698 46.7 6,814
Regional ( n = 24) 3,702 49.8 7,237
Junior National ( n = 32) 3,714 51.4 6,387
Regional ( n = 30) 3,296 42.1 6,603
75 Senior National ( n = 25) 3,089 42.1 5,588
Regional ( n = 24) 2,995 42.4 5,113
Junior National ( n = 32) 2,965 41.0 5,457
Regional ( n = 30) 2,749 38.7 4,466
50 Senior National ( n = 25) 2,917 38.6 5,171
Regional ( n = 24) 2,595 38.9 4,005
Junior National ( n = 32) 2,737 39.4 4,676
Regional ( n = 30) 2,347 35.9 3,902
25 Senior National ( n = 25) 2,725 36.8 4,876
Regional ( n = 24) 2,486 35.0 3,573
Junior National ( n = 32) 2,504 38.0 4,394
Regional ( n = 30) 2,153 33.1 3,534
0 Senior National ( n = 25) 2,262 33.0 2,221
Regional ( n = 24) 2,264 28.1 2,429
Junior National ( n = 32) 2,284 35.7 2,721
Regional ( n = 30) 1,960 30.8 1,987
Reprinted by permission from M.A. Soriano, V. Paredes, P. Comfort, et al., “’You Are Not Wrong About Getting Strong:’ An Insight
Into the Impact of Age Group and Level of Competi tion on Strength in Spanish Footbal l Players,” International Journal of Sports
Physiology and P erformance  19, no . 7 (2024): 633.
TABLE 14.7  Normative Data for Nordic Hamstring Test
832
GroupAbsolute maximal eccentric Nordic
strength (Mean ± SD,  n)Relative maximal eccentric Nordic strength
(Mean ± SD,  n ∙ kg−1)
FOOTBALL ( n = 174) 276.29 ± 74.76 4.95 ± 0.95
ATHLETICS ( n = 123) 289.73 ± 94.60 4.62 ± 1.01
Sprints ( n = 27) 347.00 ± 83.54 5.07 ± 1.10
Endur ance ( n = 40) 283.85 ± 75.20 4.90 ± 0.86
Jumps ( n = 15) 320.17 ± 74 .36 4.58 ± 0.87
Throws ( n = 5) 417.70 ± 83.92 4.14 ± 0.85
Development ( n = 28) 234.93 ± 74 .16 4.18 ± 0.91
Foundation ( n = 8) 180.69 ± 98.19 3.58 ± 0.86
MULTI-SPORTS ( n =
40)240.74 ± 77.644.30 ± 1.21
Fencing ( n = 16) 226.42 ± 71.54 4.13 ± 1.16
Gymnastics ( n = 6) 209.18 ± 57 .05 3.69 ± 0.98
Squash ( n = 12) 303.46 ± 75.22 5.17 ± 1.12
Table tennis ( n = 6) 189.71 ± 41.07 3.58 ± 1.02
TOTAL (n = 337) 276.97 ± 83.92 4.74 ± 1.03
Reprinted by permission from E. Jeanguy ot, B. Salcino vic, A. Johnson, et al., “Eccentric Hamstring Strength in Young Athletes Is
Best Documented When Normal ised to Body Mass: A Cross-Sectional Study With Normativ e Data of 590 Athletes From Different Age
Categories, ” Biology of Sport  40, no. 4 (2023): 1079-1095. Distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License ( http://creativecommons .org/licenses /by/4.0/).
TABLE 14.8  Norms for Standing Long Jump in Elite Male and Female Athletes
Percentile*Males Females
in. cm in. cm
90 133 339 115 293
80 122 309 110 279
70 116 294 104 264
60 110 279 98 249
50 104 264 92 234
40 98 249 86 219
30 92 234 80 204
20 86 219 74 189
10 80 204 69 174
*Descriptors for percentiles: 90 = well above average; 70 = above average; 50 = average; 30 = below average; 10 = well below
average
Reprinted by permission from J. Hoffman, Norms for Fitness, Performance, and Health (Human Kinetics, 2006), 58. Adapted from
D.A. Chu,  Explosiv e Power and Str ength  (Human Kinetics, 1996).
TABLE 14.9  Rankings for Standing Long Jump in 15- and 16-Year-Old Male
and Female Athletes
Category Males Females
Reprinted by permission from J. Hoffman, Norms for Fitness, Performance, and Health (Human Kinetics, 2006), 58. Adapted from
D.A. Chu,  Explosiv e Power and Str ength  (Human Kinetics, 1996).
833
in. cm in. cm
Excellent 79 201 65 166
Above average 73 186 61 156
Average 69 176 57 146
Below a verage 65 165 53 135
Poor <65 <165 <53 <135
Reprinted by permission from J. Hoffman, Norms for Fitness, Performance, and Health (Human Kinetics, 2006), 58. Adapted from
D.A. Chu,  Explosiv e Power and Str ength  (Human Kinetics, 1996).
TABLE 14.10  Vertical Jump, Static Jump, and Broad Jump Descriptive Data*
for Various Groups
Group, sport, or positionNumber of
athletesVertical jump Static jump Broad jump
in. cm in. cm in. cm
College soc cer—women (154) 51 16.1 ±
2.240.9 ±
5.6
High school soc cer—women (154) 83 15.6 ±
1.939.6 ±
4.8
College lacr osse— women (143) 79 15.8 ±
2.240.1 ±
5.6
Under 18 Gael ic footbal l—men (34) 265 17.0 ±
2.043.1 ±
5.178.0 ±
8.1198.1 ±
20.6
National soc cer—women (26) 21 12.4 ±
1.631.5 ±
4.011.9 ±
1.530.2 ±
3.8
Under 19 soc cer—women (26) 20 13.5 ±
1.534.3 ±
3.812.9 ±
1.132.8 ±
2.8
Under 17 soc cer—women (26) 21 11.4 ±
0.829.0 ±
2.011.1 ±
1.028.2 ±
2.5
Under 21 soc cer—men (26) 18 15.9 ±
1.740.4 ±
4.314.6 ±
1.537.1 ±
3.8
Under 20 soc cer—men (26) 17 15.8 ±
1.940.1 ±
4.815.0 ±
1.938.1 ±
4.8
Under 17 soc cer—men (26) 21 16.1 ±
2.040.9 ±
5.114.7 ±
1.937.3 ±
4.8
Division I Spain soc cer—women (132) 100 10.3 ±
1.926.2 ±
4.8
National ice hock ey—women (123) 23 19.8 ±
2.250.3 ±
5.6#84.6 ±
4.3214.9 ±
10.9
National soc cer—women (65) 85 12.1 ±
1.630.7 ±
4.1
Division I Norw ay soccer—women (65) 47 11.1 ±
1.628.2 ±
4.1
Ice hock ey National Hock ey League
draftees—men (24)853 24.4 ±
3.062.0 ±
7.6#100.0 ±
7.0254.0 ±
17.8
College wr estling—men (144) 20 20.5 ±
3.152.1 ±
7.9#
*The v alues l isted ar e means ± standar d deviation. The data should be r egarded as only descriptiv e, not normativ e.
#Jumps perf ormed wi th an arm swing.
834
National weightl ifting—men (46) 6 23.9 ±
1.560.7 ±
3.8
National soc cer—men (160) 17 22.2 ±
1.656.4 ±
4.1
National soc cer—men (161) 14 22.3 ±
2.656.6 ±
6.6
National soc cer—men (161) 15 20.9 ±
1.653.1 ±
4.1
National soc cer—men (141) 270 17.8 ±
0.745.2 ±
1.817.4 ±
0.544.2 ±
1.3
National handbal l—women (55) 16 15.1 ±
1.738.4 ±
4.3
National handbal l—men (53) 15 19.0 ±
2.848.3 ±
7.1
Under 16 rugb y league—men (149) 67 18.0 ±
2.045.7 ±
5.1
NCAA Division I f ootbal l—men (45) 193 28.7 ±
3.772.9 ±
9.4#
NCAA Division II f ootbal l—men (45) 181 27.3 ±
3.369.3 ±
8.4#
NCAA Division III f ootbal l—men (45) 131 26.5 ±
3.567.3 ±
8.9#
Under 20 rugb y league—men (149) 25 20.8 ±
2.152.8 ±
5.3
High school v olleybal l—women (131) 27 18.5 ±
3.347.0 ±
8.4#
NCAA Division I v olleybal l—women (131) 26 20.8 ±
2.552.8 ±
6.4#
Professional rugb y league (148) 70 16.2 ±
2.841.1 ±
7.1
Amateur rugb y league (148) 249 15.4 ±
1.939.1 ±
4.8
Academ y rugb y league (148) 261 15.7 ±
1.939.9 ±
4.8
National rugb y league f orwards—men (30) 12 14.7 ±
1.737.3 ±
4.3
National rugb y league backs—men (30) 6 15.9 ±
2.540.4 ±
6.4
National rugb y league—men (49) 26 20.0 ±
2.950.8 ±
7.4#
National rugb y league—men (48) 58 24.7 ±
2.262.7 ±
5.6#
National rugb y union—men (33) 30 101.6 ±
7.9258.1 ±
20.1
National rugb y union— women (11) 15 15.0 ±
1.638.1 ±
4.113.8 ±
1.235.1 ±
3.0
*The v alues l isted ar e means ± standar d deviation. The data should be r egarded as only descriptiv e, not normativ e.
#Jumps perf ormed wi th an arm swing.
835
High school tr ack and field— women (107) 8 83.4 ±
6.3211.8 ±
16.0
NCAA Division I soc cer—women (97) 15 12.2 ±
2.031.0 ±
5.157.9 ±
4.3147.1 ±
10.9
High school rugb y league—men (147) 302 16.3 ±
2.141.4 ±
5.3
Junior national v olleybal l—men (47) 14 21.5 ±
0.954.6 ±
2.3#
Junior national v olleybal l—women (47) 15 18.0 ±
0.645.7 ±
1.5#
Under 18 A ustralian rules f ootbal l—men
(164)177 23.9 ±
2.260.7 ±
5.6#
NCAA Division I lacr osse— women (142) 84 15.8 ±
2.240.1 ±
5.6
NCAA Division I soc cer—men (136) 27 24.3 ±
2.861.7 ±
7.1#
National soc cer—women (1) 17 12.0 ±
0.530.5 ±
1.3
National soc cer—women (108) 17 12.8 ±
1.532.5 ±
3.8
National soc cer—men (108) 17 17.2 ±
0.943.7 ±
2.3
National junior soc cer—women (108) 17 11.2 ±
0.828.4 ±
2.0
National junior soc cer—men (108) 17 17.3 ±
1.943.9 ±
4.8
National soc cer—men (2) 214 15.4 ±
2.039.1 ±
5.114.8 ±
1.937.6 ±
4.8
NCAA Division I col lege bask etball—men
(121)16 17.1 ±
0.443.4 ±
1.9
NCAA Division I col lege bask etball forwards
—men (16)37 16.2 ±
2.241.1 ±
5.6
NCAA Division I col lege bask etball guar ds
—men (16)55 17.2 ±
2.443.7 ±
6.1
*The v alues l isted ar e means ± standar d deviation. The data should be r egarded as only descriptiv e, not normativ e.
#Jumps perf ormed wi th an arm swing.
TABLE 14.11  Rebound Jump Descriptive Data* for Various Groups
Population Jump height (cm) RSI avg RSI max Device
NCAA Division I col lege bask etball forwards—men 31.1 ± 1.5^ 1.40 ± 0.08^ 1.47 ± 0.08 FP
Intercount y hurlers—men 31.3 ± 4 .1 1.72 ± 0.34 — OPTO
Intercount y Gael ic footbal l players—women 26.3 ± 4 .3 1.47 ± 0.28 — OPTO
Club Gael ic footbal l players—women 23.1 ± 4 .3 1.22 ± 0.27 — OPTO
RSI = reactiv e strength index; Avg = average; FP = force plate; OPTO = optoelectr onic device. ^ = average values taken from the
top 3 best r epetitions r ather than the top 5.
*The v alues l isted ar e means ± standar d deviation. The data should be r egarded as only descriptiv e, not normativ e.
Adapted f rom Brady et al. (2024); Hughes et al. (2024); P archmann and McB ride (2011).
836
TABLE 14.12  Margaria-Kalamen Stair Sprint Test Guidelines (Watts)
CategoryAge groups (years)
15-20 20-30 30-40 40-50 Over 50
MEN
Excellent Over 2,197 Over 2,059 Over 1,648 Over 1,226 Over 961
Good 1,844-2,197 1,726-2,059 1,383-1,648 1,040-1,226 814-961
Average 1,471-1,824 1,373-1, 716 1,098-1,373 834-1,030 647-804
Fair 1,108-1,461 1,040-1,363 834-1,088 637-824 490-637
Poor Under 1,108 Under 1,040 Under 834 Under 637 Under 490
WOMEN
Excellent Over 1,785 Over 1,648 Over 1,226 Over 961 Over 736
Good 1,491-1, 785 1,383-1,648 1,040-1,226 814-961 608-736
Average 1,187-1,481 1,098-1,373 834-1,030 647-804 481-598
Fair 902-1,177 834-1,089 637-824 490-637 373-471
Poor Under 902 Under 834 Under 637 Under 490 Under 373
Adapted by permission from E. Fox, R. Bowers, and M. Foss, The Physiological Basis for Exercise and Sport , 5th ed. (Brown &
Benchmark ,1993), 676; permission con veyed thr ough Cop yright Clear ance Center , Inc.
TABLE 14.13  Velocity-Based Training Normative Data for Barbell Velocity
Absolute strength Accelerative strength Strength-speed Speed-strength Starting strength
% 1RM 80%-100% 60%-80% 40%-60% 20%-40% Body weight to
20%
Lower body speed
range<0.50 m/s 0.50-0. 75 m/s 0.75-1.0 m/s 1.0-1.3 m/s >1.3 m/s
Upper body speed
range<0.40 m/s 0.40-0.60 m/s 0.60-0.85 m/s 0.85-1.1 m/s >1.1 m/s
Reprinted by permission from J.B. Mann,  Developing Explosiv e Athletes: Use of Velocity Based Training in Training Athletes , 4th ed.
(Ultimate A thlete Concepts, 2021).
TABLE 14.14  Descriptive Data* for 300-Yard (274 m) Shuttle Test
Group, sport, or position Number of athletes Time (s)
High school v olleybal l—women (131) 27 68.0 ± 6.3
NCAA Division 1 v olleybal l—women (131) 26 67.7 ± 3.8
National soc cer—men (142) 18 56.7 ± 1. 7
Recreational athletes—men and women (157) 81 72.8 ± 9.1
National badminton—men (155) 12 73.3 ± 3.4
*The v alues l isted ar e means ± standar d deviation. The data should be r egarded as only descriptiv e, not normativ e.
TABLE 14.15  Repetition Benchmarks for the 90-Second Box Jump Test
Age 14-15 16-17 18-20
FEMALE
Target goal 73-75 80-85 82-89
Reprinted by permission from Alpine Canada Alpin,  Fall 2022 Alpine Canada Alpin Fitness Combine Version 1.3 (Alpine Canada Alpin,
2022), 60.
837
Good 67-72 75-79 76-82
Developing 51-66 60-74 70-75
Needs tr aining ≤50 ≤59 ≤69
MALE
Target goal 74-85 92-97 95-100
Good 67-73 85-91 87-94
Developing 62-66 73-84 75-86
Needs tr aining ≤61 ≤72 ≤74
Reprinted by permission from Alpine Canada Alpin,  Fall 2022 Alpine Canada Alpin Fitness Combine Version 1.3 (Alpine Canada Alpin,
2022), 60.
TABLE 14.16  Percentiles by Age Groups and Sex for Partial Curl-Up
Percentile*Age and sex
20-29 30-39 40-49 50-59 60-69
M F M F M F M F M F
90 75 70 75 55 75 55 74 48 53 50
80 56 45 69 43 75 42 60 30 33 30
70 41 37 46 34 67 33 45 23 26 24
60 31 32 36 28 51 28 35 16 19 19
50 27 27 31 21 39 25 27 9 16 13
40 24 21 26 15 31 20 23 2 9 9
30 20 17 19 12 26 14 19 0 6 3
20 13 12 13 0 21 5 13 0 0 0
10 4 5 0 0 13 0 0 0 0 0
*Descriptors for percentile rankings: 90 = well above average; 70 = above average; 50 = average; 30 = below average; 10 = well
below a verage.
Reprinted by permission from American College of Sports Medicine,  ACSM’ s Guidel ines for Exercise Testing and Prescription , 12th
ed., edited by O. Cemal (W olters Kluwer , 2026), 101.
TABLE 14.17  Fitness Categories by Age Groups and Sex for Push-Ups
CategoryAge and sex
20-29 30-39 40-49 50-59 60-69
M F M F M F M F M F
Excellent 36 30 30 27 25 24 21 21 18 17
Very good 35 29 29 26 24 23 20 20 17 16
29 21 22 20 17 15 13 11 11 12
Good 28 20 21 19 16 14 12 10 10 11
22 15 17 13 13 11 10 7 8 5
Fair 21 14 16 12 12 10 9 6 7 4
17 10 12 8 10 5 7 2 5 2
Canadian Physical Activi ty Training for Health (CSEP-P ATH®), 3rd Edition. © 2021 Canadian Society for Exercise Physiology
(csep .ca/csep-path). R eprinted wi th permission.
838
Needs impr ovement 16 9 11 7 9 4 6 1 4 1
Canadian Physical Activi ty Training for Health (CSEP-P ATH®), 3rd Edition. © 2021 Canadian Society for Exercise Physiology
(csep .ca/csep-path). R eprinted wi th permission.
TABLE 14.18  Normative Data for the AFT Hand-Release Push-Up
17-21 22-26 27-31 32-36 37-41 42-46 47-51 52-56 57-61 Over 61
POINTS M F M F M F M F M F M F M F M F M F M FPOINTS
100 5753 6150 6248 6047 5941 5636 5535 5130 4624 43 24 100
99 5650 6049 5945 5946 5739 5534 5334 4828 4323 41 23 99
98 5447 5746 5642 5643 5436 5331 5031 4526 4022 39 22 98
97 5345 5443 5539 5440 5334 5030 4730 4325 3821 37 21 97
96 5143 5342 5338 5337 5133 4828 4427 4024 3720 35 20 96
95 5042 5239 5236 5236 4831 4626 4225 3823 3519 34 19 95
94 4939 5037 5135 5035 4628 4424 4124 3522 3418 33 18 94
93 48 --4936 4934 4834 4527 4323 3923 3420 33 --31 -- 93
92 4738 4835 4833 4732 4426 4222 3822 3319 3117 30 17 92
91 4637 4734 4732 4531 4323 4121 3621 3218 3016 29 16 91
90 4536 4633 4630 4430 4222 3820 3420 3117 2915 26 15 90
89 4435 4532 4528 4328 41 --37 --3319 30 --2614 24 14 89
88 4334 4431 4427 4226 3921 3619 --18 2816 25 -- -- -- 88
87 4233 4330 4326 4125 38 --3418 32 --2715 24 --23 -- 87
86 4132 4228 4225 40 --3720 3317 3117 26 --23 -- --13 86
85 --31 4127 41 --3924 34 --3216 3016 2514 ----22 -- 85
84 4030 4026 4024 38 --3319 ----2915 24 --2213 21 -- 84
83 3929 3825 3823 3623 3218 3115 2814 23 --21 --20 -- 83
82 3828 3724 3722 34 -- --17 30 --27 -- --13 20 --19 -- 82
81 ---- ----36 --3322 31 --2914 2513 22 --19 --18 -- 81
80 3727 35 --3521 --19 3016 28 --23 --21 --18 --17 -- 80
79 3626 3423 3420 32 --2915 2713 22 --20 -- ----16 12 79
78 3525 3322 3319 --18 2814 26 -- ----19 --17 -- -- -- 78
77 3424 3221 3218 31 --27 --25 --21 --18 -- --12 15 -- 77
76 3323 3119 --17 30 --2613 23 -- ----17 --16 --14 -- 76
75 3222 ----31 --2917 25 --22 --20 -- ----15 -- -- -- 75
74 --21 --18 3016 2816 24 --21 --1912 1612 ----13 -- 74
73 31 --30 --29 --2615 23 --2012 18 -- ----14 -- -- -- 73
72 3020 2717 2715 2414 2212 ----17 --15 -- ---- -- -- 72
71 2919 2616 26 --23 --21 --19 --16 --14 --13 --12 -- 71
70 2818 2515 2314 2213 20 --18 --15 -- ---- ---- -- -- 70
Reprinted from U.S. Army, “Army Fitness Test Score Tables: Hand-r elease Push-Up (HRP) (number of correctly performed repetitions
in 2 minutes), ” last modified June 1, 2025. Before consulting  the above table , check for the latest update  at: https:// www
.army.mil/e2/downloads /rv7/aft/AFT_Scoring _Scales_250601 .pdf.
839
69 2717 2214 21 --21 --19 --17 --14 --13 -- ---- --11 69
68 2516 2113 --13 20 --17 --16 --13 -- ----12 --11 -- 68
67 24 -- ---- ----19 --1611 1511 --11 1211 --11 -- -- 67
66 2315 20 --20 --1712 15 --14 --12 -- ---- ---- -- -- 66
65 2214 1712 1812 16 --14 --13 -- ---- ----11 -- -- -- 65
64 2013 16 --16 --1411 13 --12 -- ----11 -- ---- -- -- 64
63 17 --14 --1411 13 --12 -- ----11 -- ---- ---- -- -- 63
62 1612 1311 12 --12 -- ----11 -- ---- ---- ---- -- -- 62
61 1311 12 --11 --11 --11 -- ---- ---- ---- ---- -- -- 61
60 1010 1010 1010 1010 1010 1010 1010 1010 1010 10 10 60
Reprinted from U.S. Army, “Army Fitness Test Score Tables: Hand-r elease Push-Up (HRP) (number of correctly performed repetitions
in 2 minutes), ” last modified June 1, 2025. Before consulting  the above table , check for the latest update  at: https:// www
.army.mil/e2/downloads /rv7/aft/AFT_Scoring _Scales_250601 .pdf.
TABLE 14.19  YMCA Bench Press Norms
Percentile*Age and sex
18-25 26-35 36-45 46-55 56-65 >65
M F M F M F M F M F M F
90 44 42 41 40 36 33 28 29 24 24 20 18
80 37 34 33 32 29 28 22 22 20 20 14 14
70 33 28 29 28 25 24 20 18 14 14 10 10
60 29 25 26 24 22 21 16 14 12 12 10 8
50 26 21 22 21 20 17 13 12 10 9 8 6
40 22 18 20 17 17 14 11 9 8 6 6 4
30 20 16 17 14 14 12 9 7 5 5 4 3
20 16 12 13 12 10 8 6 5 3 3 2 1
10 10 6 9 6 6 4 2 1 1 1 1 0
*Descriptors for percentiles: 90 = well above average; 70 = above average; 50 = average; 30 = below average; 10 = well
below a verage
Score is the number of repetitions completed in 1 minute using an 80-pound  (36 kg) barbel l for men and a 35-pound (16 kg)
barbel l for women.
Adapted f rom YMCA (2000).
TABLE 14.20  Descriptive Data for the Star Excursion Balance Test
Score High school Collegiate
ANT (%) 69.9 ± 7 .9 70.3 ± 7 .1
PM (%)* 83.5 ± 10.2 86.7 ± 10. 7
ANT = Anterior
PM = P osteromedial
PL = P osterolater al
COMP = Composi te
*Statistical ly signi ficant di fference between gr oups ( N ≤ 0.05)
Reprinted by permission from R.S. McCann, K.B. Kosik, M.Q. Beard, et al., “Variations in Star Excursion Balance Test Performance
Between High School and Collegiate Football Players,” The Journal of Strength and Condi tioning Resear ch 29, no. 10 (2015): 2765-
2770.
840
PL (%)* 72.8 ± 11.4 77.1 ± 10.2
COMP (%)* 75.4 ± 8.5 78.0 ± 7 .4
ANT = Anterior
PM = P osteromedial
PL = P osterolater al
COMP = Composi te
*Statistical ly signi ficant di fference between gr oups ( N ≤ 0.05)
Reprinted by permission from R.S. McCann, K.B. Kosik, M.Q. Beard, et al., “Variations in Star Excursion Balance Test Performance
Between High School and Collegiate Football Players,” The Journal of Strength and Condi tioning Resear ch 29, no. 10 (2015): 2765-
2770.
TABLE 14.21  Normalized Reach Distance on the Star Excursion Balance Test
for Each Limb, by Team
Sex/Sport Anterior Posterolateral Posteromedial Composite Anterior Posterolateral Posteromedial Composite
WOMEN DOMINANT LIMB NONDOMINANT LIMB
Basketball64.3 ±
6.988.7 ± 8.0 100.2 ± 7 .1 84.4 ± 6.5 63.4 ±
7.985.7 ± 8.4 101.5 ± 7 .7 83.5 ± 7 .0
(61.2,
67.4)(85.1, 92.4) (97.0, 103.5) (81.5, 87 .4) (59.8,
67.0)(81.8, 89.6) (98.0, 105.0) (80.3, 86. 7)
Golf 69.4 ±
5.586.5 ± 10.2 105.3 ± 10.0 87.0 ± 7 .7 67.6 ±
4.485.9 ± 8. 7 102.2 ± 7 .8 85.2 ± 6.2
(65.4,
73.3)(79.2, 93.8) (98.2, 112.4) (81.5, 92.6) (64.5,
70.8)(79.7, 92.1) (96.7, 107.8) (80.8, 89. 7)
Hockey 66.6 ±
7.393.1 ± 10. 7 110.3 ± 10. 790.0 ± 8.6 67.0 ±
6.993.0 ± 11.0 113.1 ± 7 .6 91.0 ± 7 .5
(64.1,
69.1)(89.5, 96.8) (106.7, 114.0) (87.1, 92.9) (64.6,
69.3)(89.2, 96. 7) (110.5, 115.6) (88.5, 93.5)
Soccer 66.8 ±
5.388.7 ± 8.8 104.3 ± 8.0 86.6 ± 6.3 67.4 ±
5.290.2 ± 9.9 105.3 ± 8.1 87.7 ± 6. 7
(65.1,
68.5)(85.9, 91.5) (101.8, 106.8) (84.6, 88.6) (65.8,
69.1)(89.1, 93.3) (102.8, 107 .9) (85.5, 89.8)
Softbal l 63.5 ±
5.687.0 ± 11.3 100.7 ± 8.8 83.7 ± 7 .5 63.9 ±
4.885.3 ± 9.2 99.6 ± 9.3 82.9 ± 6.3
(61.2,
65.9)(82.4, 91.6) (97.1, 104 .3) (80.6, 86.9) (61.9,
65.8)(81.5, 89.1) (95.7, 103.4) (80.3, 85.5)
Volleybal l 66.8 ±
7.186.6 ± 10.4 102.7 ± 10.5 85.4 ± 8.5 65.3 ±
5.488.4 ± 9.5 102.3 ± 7 .9 85.3 ± 6.9
(63.6,
69.9)(82.0, 91.2) (98.1, 107 .4) (81.6, 89.2) (62.9,
67.7)(84.2, 92.6) (98.8, 105.9) (82.3, 88.4)
MEN DOMINANT LIMB NONDOMINANT LIMB
Basketball61.8 ±
4.386.6 ± 11.6 99.2 ± 7 .8 82.5 ± 5.9 61.6 ±
4.886.9 ± 13.0 97.9 ± 7 .9 82.1 ± 6.5
(59.6,
64.1)(80.6, 92.5) (95.2, 103.2) (79.5, 85.6) (59.2,
64.1)(80.2, 93.6) (93.9, 102.0) (78.8, 85.5)
*Values ar e mean ± SD (95% confidence interv al) per cent l imb length.
Reprinted by permission from M.R. Stiffler, J.L. Sanfilippo, M.A. Brooks, and B.C. Heiderschei t, “Star Excursion Balance Test
Performance Varies by Sport in Healthy Division I Collegiate Athlete, ” Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy 45, no. 10
(2015): 775.
841
Golf 65.1 ±
6.283.9 ± 12.1 103.7 ± 9.0 84.2 ± 8.5 68.2 ±
4.785.3 ± 10.2 106.0 ± 7 .2 86.5 ± 5.9
(61.2,
69.1)(76.2, 92.6) (98.0, 109.4) (78.9, 89.6) (65.2,
71.2)(78.9, 91.8) (101.4 , 110.6) (82.8, 90.2)
Hockey 67.3 ±
5.295.6 ± 9.5 110.9 ± 5.5 91.3 ± 5.0 67.6 ±
4.096.6 ± 10.6 111.2 ± 5. 7 91.8 ± 5.6
(65.6,
69.0)(92.5, 98. 7) (109.2, 112. 7)(89.6, 92.9) (66.3,
68.9)(93.2, 100.1) (109.4 , 113.0) (90.0, 93.6)
Soccer 62.7 ±
4.989.9 ± 7 .7 103.5 ± 8.6 85.4 ± 5.5 62.9 ±
5.089.9 ± 8.3 104.2 ± 8.8 85.7 ± 5.9
(61.1,
64.2)(87.5, 92.4) (100.8, 106.2) (83.6, 87 .1) (61.3,
64.5)(87.3, 92.5) (101.4 , 107.0) (83.8, 87 .5)
Footbal l 62.2 ±
8.288.6 ± 12.9 99.8 ± 8. 7 83.5 ± 7 .9 61.9 ±
7.387.9 ± 13.0 99.8 ± 8.9 83.2 ± 8.0
(60.4,
64.0)(85.8, 91.5) (97.9, 101. 7) (81.8, 85.3) (60.3,
63.5)(85.1, 90.8) (97.9, 101.8) (81.4, 85.0)
Wrestling 66.7 ±
6.791.1 ± 11.9 110.3 ± 11.1 89.4 ± 8.2 67.8 ±
8.290.8 ± 10.3 111.0 ± 12.3 89.9 ± 8.3
(64.7,
68.7)(87.6, 94 .6) (107.0, 113.5) (87.0, 91.8) (65.4,
70.2)(87.8, 93.8) (107.4, 114.6) (87.4, 92.3)
*Values ar e mean ± SD (95% confidence interv al) per cent l imb length.
Reprinted by permission from M.R. Stiffler, J.L. Sanfilippo, M.A. Brooks, and B.C. Heiderschei t, “Star Excursion Balance Test
Performance Varies by Sport in Healthy Division I Collegiate Athlete, ” Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy 45, no. 10
(2015): 775.
TABLE 14.22  Maximal Rate of Oxygen Consumption, 1.5-Mile (2.4 km) Run
Time, Sit-and-Reach Test, and Body Composition: Percentile Rankings for 20-
to 29-Year-Old Males
PercentileaV̇O2max (mL · kg−1 · min−1)1.5-mile (2.4 km) run time, min:sSit-and-reach testb
Body fat (%) in. cm
99 60.5 8:29 4.2
90 54.0 9:34 22 55.9 7.9
80 51.1 10:09 20 50.8 10.5
70 47.5 10:59 19 48.3 12.6
60 45.6 11:29 18 45.7 14.8
50 43.9 11:58 17 43.2 16.6
40 41.7 12:38 15 38.1 18.6
30 39.9 13:15 14 35.6 20.7
20 38.0 14:00 13 33.0 23.3
10 34.7 15:30 11 27.9 26.6
01 26.5 20:58 33.4
aDescriptors for percentiles: 90 = well above average; 70 = above average; 50 = average; 30 = below average; 10 = well below
average
bSit and r each f or 18- to 25- year-old men.
Adapted f rom American Col lege of Sports Medicine (2014).
842
TABLE 14.23  Maximal Rate of Oxygen Consumption, 1.5-Mile (2.4 km) Run
Time, Sit-and-Reach Test, and Body Composition: Percentile Rankings for 20-
to 29-Year-Old Females
PercentileaV̇O2max (ml · kg−1 · min−1)1.5-mile (2.4 km) run time, min:sSit-and-reach testb
Body fat (%) in. cm
99 54.5 9:30 11.4
90 46.8 11:10 24 61.0 15.1
80 43.9 11:58 22 55.9 16.8
70 41.1 12:51 21 53.3 18.4
60 39.5 13:24 20 50.8 19.8
50 37.8 14:04 19 48.3 21.5
40 36.1 14:50 18 45.7 23.4
30 34.1 15:46 17 43.2 25.5
20 32.3 16:46 16 40.6 28.2
10 29.5 18:33 14 35.6 33.5
01 23.7 23:58 38.6
aDescriptors for percentiles: 90 = well above average; 70 = above average; 50 = average; 30 = below average; 10 = well below
average
bSit and r each f or 18- to 25- year-old women.
Adapted f rom American Col lege of Sports Medicine (2014).
TABLE 14.24  Maximal Rate of Oxygen Consumption, 1.5-Mile (2.4 km) Run
Time, Sit-and-Reach Test, and Body Composition: Percentile Rankings for 30-
to 39-Year-Old Males
PercentileaV̇O2max (ml · kg−1 · min−1)1.5-mile (2.4 km) run time, min:sSit-and-reach testb
Body fat (%) in. cm
99 58.3 8:49 7.3
90 51.7 10:01 21 53.3 12.4
80 48.3 10:46 19 48.3 14.9
70 46.0 11:22 18 45.7 16.8
60 44.1 11:54 17 43.2 18.4
50 42.4 12:24 15 38.1 20.0
40 40.7 12:58 14 35.6 21.6
30 38.7 13:44 13 33.0 23.2
20 36.7 14:34 11 27.9 25.1
10 33.8 15:57 9 22.9 27.8
01 26.5 20:58 34.4
aDescriptors for percentiles: 90 = well above average; 70 = above average; 50 = average; 30 = below average; 10 = well below
average
bSit and r each f or 26- to 35- year-old men.
Adapted f rom American Col lege of Sports Medicine (2014).
843
TABLE 14.25  Maximal Rate of Oxygen Consumption, 1.5-Mile (2.4 km) Run
Time, Sit-and-Reach Test, and Body Composition: Percentile Rankings for 30-
to 39-Year-Old Females
PercentileaV̇O2max (ml · kg−1 · min−1)1.5-mile (2.4 km) run time, min:sSit-and-reach testb
Body fat (%) in. cm
99 52.0 9:58 11.2
90 45.3 11:33 23 58.4 15.5
80 42.4 12:24 22 55.9 17.5
70 39.6 13:24 21 53.3 19.2
60 37.7 14:08 20 50.8 21.0
50 36.7 14:34 19 48.3 22.8
40 34.2 15:43 17 43.2 24.8
30 32.4 16:42 16 40.6 26.9
20 30.9 17:38 15 38.1 29.6
10 28.0 19:43 13 33.0 33.6
01 22.9 24:56 39.0
aDescriptors for percentiles: 90 = well above average; 70 = above average; 50 = average; 30 = below average; 10 = well below
average
bSit and r each f or 26- to 35- year-old women.
Adapted f rom American Col lege of Sports Medicine (2014).
TABLE 14.26  V̇O2max Descriptive Data for Athletes in Various Sports
CategoryTypical V̇O2max of athletes playing the sport (ml · kg−1 ·
min−1)
Sport Males Females
Extremely
high70+ 60+ Cross-country ski ing
Middle-distance running
Long-distance running
Very high 63-69 54-59 Bicycling
Rowing
Racewalking
High 57-62 49-53 Soccer
Middle-distance swimming
Canoe r acing
Handbal l
Racquetbal l
Speedskating
Figure skating
Downhi ll skiing
Wrestling
Above
average52-56 44-48 Basketball
Ballet dancing
American f ootbal l (offensive, def ensive
backs)
Gymnastics
Hockey
Horse r acing ( jockey)
Data f rom Nieman (1995).
844
Sprint swimming
Tennis
Sprint running
Jumping
Average 44-51 35-43 Basebal l, softbal l
American f ootbal l (linemen, quarterbacks)
Shot put
Discus thr ow
Weightl ifting
Bodybui lding
Data f rom Nieman (1995).
TABLE 14.27  Percentile Ranks for the 12-Minute Run
Percentile*Age (years) and distance
20-29 30-39 40-49
km miles km miles km miles
MEN
90 2.90 1.80 2.82 1.75 2.72 1.69
80 2.78 1.73 2.67 1.66 2.57 1.60
70 2.62 1.63 2.56 1.59 2.46 1.53
60 2.54 1.58 2.48 1.54 2.40 1.49
50 2.46 1.53 2.40 1.49 2.30 1.43
40 2.37 1.47 2.32 1.44 2.22 1.38
30 2.29 1.42 2.24 1.39 2.14 1.33
20 2.20 1.37 2.14 1.33 2.06 1.28
10 2.06 1.28 2.01 1.25 1.95 1.21
WOMEN
90 2.59 1.61 2.53 1.57 2.43 1.51
80 2.46 1.53 2.40 1.49 2.27 1.41
70 2.35 1.46 2.27 1.41 2.20 1.37
60 2.27 1.41 2.19 1.36 2.11 1.31
50 2.20 1.37 2.14 1.33 2.04 1.27
40 2.12 1.32 2.04 1.27 1.96 1.22
30 2.03 1.26 1.95 1.21 1.90 1.18
20 1.95 1.21 1.88 1.17 1.82 1.13
10 1.82 1.13 1.75 1.09 1.70 1.05
*Descriptors for percentiles: 90 = well above average; 70 = above average; 50 = average; 30 = below average; 10 = well below
average
Adapted f rom American Col lege of Sports Medicine (2014).
TABLE 14.28  Descriptive Data* for Yo-Yo Intermittent Recovery Test for
Various Populations
Group, sport, or position Number of athletes Yo-Yo IR1
*The v alues l isted ar e means ± standar d deviation. The data should be r egarded as only descriptiv e, not normativ e.
845
Distance (m) Distance (yd)
National soc cer—men (106) 18 2,260 ± 80 2,472 ± 87
National soc cer—men (106) 24 2,040 ± 60 2,231 ± 66
National rugb y league—men (4) 23 1,656 ± 403 1,811 ± 441
Semi-pr ofessional rugb y league—men (4) 27 1,564 ± 415 1,710 ± 454
National soc cer—women (108) 17 1,224 ± 255 1,339 ± 279
National soc cer—men (108) 17 2,414 ± 456 2,640 ± 499
National junior soc cer—women (108) 17 826 ± 160 903 ± 175
National junior soc cer—men (108) 17 2,092 ± 260 2,288 ± 284
Under 17 soc cer—men (37) 60 1,556 ± 478 1,702 ± 523
Under 16 rugb y union—men (117) 150 1,150 ± 403 1,258 ± 441
Under 14 el ite bask etball—men (152) 15 1,100 ± 385 1,203 ± 421
Under 15 el ite bask etball—men (152) 15 1,283 ± 461 1,403 ± 504
Under 17 el ite bask etball—men (152) 17 1,412 ± 245 1,544 ± 268
Under 18 Gael ic footbal l—men (34) 265 1,465 ± 370 1,602 ± 405
*The v alues l isted ar e means ± standar d deviation. The data should be r egarded as only descriptiv e, not normativ e.
846
847
FIGURE 14.34  30-15 IF T perf ormance among athletes of di fferent ages, sports, and pla ying standar ds: (a) male and  (b) female.
Adapted by permission from Buchheit, M, Dikmen, U, and Vassallo, C. The 30-15 intermittent fitness test—two decades of learnings. SPSR 148:1-13, 2021.
TABLE 14.29  Descriptive Data* for Change-of-Direction Tests for Various
Populations
Group, sport, or position Number of athletesTime (s)
5-10-5 T-test 5-0-5 Hexagon
College soc cer—women (154) 51 4.88 ± 0.20
High school soc cer—women (154) 83 4.91 ± 0.22
College lacr osse— women (154) 79 4.99 ± 0.24
National softbal l—women (112) 10 2.66 ± 0.14
National bask etball—women (140) 12 2.69 ± 0.28
College students— women (130) 34 11.92 ± 0.52
College students—men (130) 52 10.08 ± 0.46
NCAA Division II col lege soc cer—men (93) 12 4.80 ± 0.33
Recreational athletes— women (143) 20 5.23 ± 0.25 11.70 ± 0.67
Recreational athletes—men (143) 24 4.67 ± 0.21 10.31 ± 0.46
High school rugb y league—men (142) 70 2.42 ± 0.12
High school rugb y league—men (50) 28 2.30 ± 0.13
High school rugb y league—men (147) 302 2.49 ± 0.14
High school rugb y league—men (147) 870 2.51 ± 0.15
Junior national v olleybal l—men (47) 14 9.90 ± 0.17
Junior national v olleybal l—women (47) 15 10.33 ± 0.13
NCAA Division I col lege lacr osse— women (153) 84 4.99 ± 0.23
NCAA Division III col lege lacr osse— women (73) 11 4.92 ± 0.22 10.50 ± 0.60
MLB basebal l—men (74) 62 4.42 ± 0.90
AAA basebal l—men (74) 52 4.53 ± 0.20
AA basebal l—men (74) 50 4.42 ± 0.68
A basebal l—men (74) 84 4.48 ± 0.54
Rookie basebal l—men (74) 90 4.54 ± 0.19
High school v olleybal l—women (131) 27 10.96 ± 0.58
NCAA Division I v olleybal l—women (131) 26 10.65 ± 0.52
Recreational athletes— women (118) 52 12.52 ± 0.90 13.21 ± 1.68
Recreational athletes—men (118) 58 10.49 ± 0.89 12.33 ± 1.47
College athletes— women (118) 56 10.94 ± 0.60 12.87 ± 1.48
College athletes— women (118) 47 9.94 ± 0.50 12.29 ± 1.39
*The v alues l isted ar e means ± standar d deviation. The data should be r egarded as only descriptiv e, not normativ e.
TABLE 14.30  Percentile Ranks for the 5-10-5 (Previously Pro Agility) Test
(Seconds)  in NCAA Division I College Athletes
848
Percentile*Women’s
volleyballWomen’s
basketballWomen’s
softballMen’s
basketballMen’s
baseballMen’s American
football
90 4.75 4.65 4.88 4.22 4.25 4.21
80 4.84 4.82 4.96 4.29 4.36 4.31
70 4.91 4.86 5.03 4.35 4.41 4.38
60 4.98 4.94 5.10 4.39 4.46 4.44
50 5.01 5.06 5.17 4.41 4.50 4.52
40 5.08 5.10 5.24 4.44 4.55 4.59
30 5.17 5.14 5.33 4.48 4.61 4.66
20 5.23 5.23 5.40 4.51 4.69 4.76
10 5.32 5.36 5.55 4.61 4.76 4.89
Mean 5.03 5.02 5.19 4.41 4.53 4.54
SD 0.20 0.26 0.26 0.18 0.23 0.27
n 81 128 118 97 165 869
*Descriptors for percentiles: 90 = well above average; 70 = above average; 50 = average; 30 = below average; 10 = well below
average
Data col lected using electr onic timing devices. SD = standar d deviation,  n = number of athletes.
Adapted b y permission f rom J. Hoffman, Norms f or Fitness, P erformance, and Heal th (Human Kinetics, 2006), 36-38, 55-58, 113.
TABLE 14.31  Descriptive Data for the Illinois Test: Boys 14 to 16 Years
Evaluation Limits % Number of people included in the group
High <15.83 s 2.28 0
Above average 15.83-16.93 s 13.59 4
Average 16.94-19.13 s 68.27 12
Below a verage 19.14-20.23 s 13.59 3
Low >20.23 s 2.28 1
Reprinted by permission from Z. Boyan and V. Batchev , “Investigation on the ‘Agility’ Skill at 14- to 16-Year Old Students by Illinois
Agility Test,” National Sports Academ y ‘Vasil Levski’  (2019): 444 . https:// doi.org/10.37393 /icass2019 /82.
TABLE 14.32  Descriptive Data for the Illinois Test: Boys and Girls 16 to 19
Years
EvaluationSex
Male Female
Excellent <15.2 s <17.0 s
Above average 15.2-16.1 s 17.0-17.9 s
Average 16.2-18.1 s 18.0-21. 7 s
Below a verage 18.2-18.3 s 21.8-23.0 s
Low >18.3 s >23.0 s
TABLE 14.33  Descriptive Data* for Speed Testing for Various Populations
Group, sport, or position Number of athletesTime (s)
10 m 20 m 40 m
*The v alues l isted ar e means ± standar d deviation. The data should be r egarded as only descriptiv e, not normativ e.
849
College soc cer—women (154) 51 3.38 ± 0.17 5.99 ± 0.29
High school soc cer—women (154) 83 3.33 ± 0.15 5.94 ± 0.28
College lacr osse— women (154) 79 3.37 ± 0.14 5.97 ± 0.27
NCAA Division I col lege soc cer—women (97) 15 2.31 ± 0.25
Under 16 rugb y league—men (149) 67 1.82 ± 0.07 3.13 ± 0.00
Under 17 rugb y league—men (149) 50 1.81 ± 0.06 3.12 ± 0.10
Under 18 rugb y league—men (149) 56 1.80 ± 0.06 3.09 ± 0.10
Under 19 rugb y league—men (149) 89 1.82 ± 0.07 3.11 ± 0.12
Under 20 rugb y league—men (149) 22 1.79 ± 0.06 3.07 ± 0.12
National soc cer—men (149) 17 1.82 ± 0.30 3.00 ± 0.30
National rugb y league—men (7) 20 1.61 ± 0.06 5.15 ± 0.02
State rugb y league—men (7) 20 1.66 ± 0.06 5.13 ± 0.02
National rugb y league f orwards—men (30) 12 1.66 ± 0.20 3.00 ± 0.08
National rugb y league backs—men (30) 6 1.65 ± 0.15 2.91 ± 0.10
State rugb y league—men (50) 26 2.06 ± 0.18 3.36 ± 0.23 5.83 ± 0.31
National rugb y union—men (33) 30 1.69 ± 0.10 2.93 ± 0.20
National rugb y league f orwards—men (102) 63 5.27 ± 0.19
National rugb y league backs—men (102) 55 5.08 ± 0.20
National badminton—men (155) 12 1.94 ± 0.18 3.35 ± 0.30
National rugb y league—men (48) 58 1.73 ± 0.07 5.25 ± 0.17
Under 18 el ite rugb y league—men (50) 28 1.81 ± 0.08 3.11 ± 0.12 5.56 ± 0.22
Under 18 sub-el ite rugb y league—men (50) 36 1.94 ± 0.11 3.28 ± 0.18 5.83 ± 0.35
High school rugb y league—men (147) 302 1.88 ± 0.12 3.23 ± 0.16
High school rugb y league—men (147) 870 1.90 ± 0.12 3.27 ± 0.19
Junior national v olleybal l—women (47) 20 1.90 ± 0.01
Junior national v olleybal l—men (47) 14 1.80 ± 0.02
Under 18 A ustralian rules f ootbal l—men (164) 177 3.13 ± 0.09
NCAA Division III col lege soc cer—men (93) 12 1.96 ± 0.11 5.79 ± 0.31
NCAA Division I col lege soc cer—men (136) 27 1.70 ± 0.10 4.90 ± 0.20
National A ustralian rules f ootbal l—men (163) 35 1.89 ± 0.07 3.13 ± 0.10 5.40 ± 0.17
National A ustralian rules f ootbal l—men (163) 30 1.70 ± 0.06 2.94 ± 0.08
National soc cer—women (65) 85 1.67 ± 0.07
National soc cer—women (65) 47 1.70 ± 0.07
National soc cer—women (1) 17 3.17 ± 0.03
National soc cer—men (141) 270 2.27 ± 0.40 3.38 ± 0. 70
Under 18 Gael ic footbal l—men (34) 265 3.22 ± 0.15
Group, sport, or position Number of athletesTime (s)
10 yd 20 yd 40 yd
*The v alues l isted ar e means ± standar d deviation. The data should be r egarded as only descriptiv e, not normativ e.
850
NCAA Division I col lege lacr osse— women (153) 1.99 ± 0.10 3.37 ± 0.14 5.97 ± 0.26
MLB basebal l—men (74) 62 1.52 ± 0.10
AAA basebal l—men (74) 52 1.55 ± 0.09
NCAA Division I f ootbal l—men (45) 281 4.88 ± 0.27
NCAA Division II f ootbal l—men (45) 282 4.92 ± 0.26
NCAA Division III f ootbal l—men (45) 205 4.96 ± 0.27
*The v alues l isted ar e means ± standar d deviation. The data should be r egarded as only descriptiv e, not normativ e.
TABLE 14.34  Normative Data for the Balance Error Scoring System Test
Age Women Men
20-29 11.9 ± 5.1 10.4 ± 4 .4
30-39 11.4 ± 5.6 11.5 ± 5.5
40-49 12.7 ± 6.9 12.4 ± 5. 7
50-54 15.1 ± 8.2 13.6 ± 6.9
55-59 16.7 ± 8.2 16.4 ± 7 .2
60-64 19.3 ± 8.8 17.2 ± 7 .1
65-69 19.9 ± 6.6 20.0 ± 7 .3
Adapted f rom Iverson and K oehle (2013).
TABLE 14.35  Equations for Calculating Estimated Body Density From
Skinfold Measurements Among Various Populations
SKF sitesaPopulation
subgroups Sex Age Equation Reference
Σ7SKF (chest + abdomen + triceps +
subscapular + supr ailiac + midaxi lla +
thigh)Black or Hispanic Women 18-55 y ears Db (g/c c)b = 1.0970
− 0.00046971
(Σ7SKF)
+ 0.00000056
(Σ7SKF)2
− 0.00012828 (age)Jackson et al.
(82)
Σ7SKF (chest + abdomen + triceps +
subscapular + supr ailiac + midaxi lla +
thigh)Black or athletes Men 18-61 y ears Db (g/c c)b = 1.1120
− 0.00043499
(Σ7SKF)
+ 0.00000055
(Σ7SKF)2
− 0.00028826 (age)Jackson and
Pollock (80)
Σ4SKF (triceps + anterior supr ailiac +
abdomen + thigh)Athletes Women 18-29 y ears Db (g/c c)b =
1.096095
− 0.0006952
(Σ4SKF)
− 0.0000011
(Σ4SKF)2
− 0.0000714 (age)Jackson et al.
(82)
a∑SKF = sum of skinf olds (mm); Db = body densi ty.
bUse population-speci fic con version f ormulas (see table 14 .36) to calculate %BF f rom Db .
cMale athletes = 1; f emale athletes = 0.
dBlack athletes = 1; whi te athletes = 0.
Adapted by permission from A.L. Gibson, D.R. Wagner , and V.H. Heyw ard, Advanced Fitness Assessment and Exercise Prescription ,
9th ed. (Human Kinetics, 2025), 273.
851
Σ3SKF (triceps + supr ailiac + thigh) White or
anorexicWomen 18-55 y ears Db (g/c c)b =
1.0994921
− 0.0009929
(Σ3SKF)
+ 0.0000023
(Σ3SKF)2
− 0.0001392 (age)Jackson et al.
(82)
Σ3SKF (chest + abdomen + thigh) White Men 18-61 y ears Db (g/c c)b =
1.109380
− 0.0008267
(Σ3SKF)
+ 0.0000016
(Σ3SKF)2
− 0.0002574 (age)Jackson and
Pollock (82)
Σ2SKF (triceps + cal f) Black or whi te Boys 6-17 y ears %BF = 0. 735
(Σ2SKF) + 1.0Slaughter et al.
(137)
Σ2SKF (triceps + cal f) Black or whi te Girls 6-17 y ears %BF = 0.610
(Σ2SKF) + 5.1Slaughter et al.
(137)
Suprailiac, triceps Athletes Women High school
and col lege ageDb (g/c c)b = 1.0764
− (0.00081 ×
suprailiac)
− (0.00088 ×
triceps)Sloan and W eir
(138)
Thigh, subscapular Athletes Men High school
and col lege ageDb (g/c c)b = 1.1043
− (0.00133 × thigh)
− (0.00131 ×
subscapular)Sloan and W eir
(138)
Σ3SKF (triceps + abdomen + thigh) Athletes Men or
women18-34 y ears %BF = 8.997 +
0.24658 (S3SKF)
− 6.343 (genderc)
− 1.998 (r aced)Evans et al. (41)
a∑SKF = sum of skinf olds (mm); Db = body densi ty.
bUse population-speci fic con version f ormulas (see table 14 .36) to calculate %BF f rom Db .
cMale athletes = 1; f emale athletes = 0.
dBlack athletes = 1; whi te athletes = 0.
Adapted by permission from A.L. Gibson, D.R. Wagner , and V.H. Heyw ard, Advanced Fitness Assessment and Exercise Prescription ,
9th ed. (Human Kinetics, 2025), 273.
TABLE 14.36  Population-Specific Two-Component Model Formulas for
Converting Body Density to Percent Body Fat
Population Age (yr) Sex %BFa FFB d (g· cc−1)b
RACE OR ETHNICITY
African American 9-17 Female (5.24/Db) − 4 .82 1.088
19-45 Male (4.86/Db) − 4 .39 1.106
24-79 Female (4.85/Db) − 4 .39 1.106
American I ndian 18-62 Male (4.97/Db) − 4 .52 1.099
FFB d = fat-free body densi ty; Db = body densi ty; %BF = per cent body f at; NA = no data a vailable f or this population subgr oup.
aMultiply v alue b y 100 to calculate %BF .
bFFB d based on a verage v alues r eported in selected r esear ch articles.
Adapted by permission from A.L. Gibson, D.R. Wagner , and V.H. Heyw ard, Advanced Fitness Assessment and Exercise Prescription ,
9th ed. (Human Kinetics, 2025), 273.
852
18-60 Female (4.81/Db) − 4 .34 1.108
Japanese Nativ e 18-48 Male (4.97/Db) − 4 .52 1.099
Female (4.76/Db) − 4 .28 1.111
61-78 Male (4.87/Db) − 4 .41 1.105
Female (4.95/Db) − 4 .50 1.100
Singapor ean (Chinese, I ndian, Mala y) Male (4.94/Db) − 4 .48 1.102
Female (4.84/Db) − 4 .37 1.107
White 8-12 Male (5.27/Db) − 4 .85 1.086
Female (5.27/Db) − 4 .85 1.086
13-17 Male (5.12/Db) − 4 .69 1.092
Female (5.19/Db) − 4 .76 1.090
18-59 Male (4.95/Db) − 4 .50 1.100
Female (4.96/Db) − 4 .51 1.101
60-90 Male (4.97/Db) − 4 .52 1.099
Female (5.02/Db) − 4 .57 1.098
Hispanic 20-40 Male NA NA
Female (4.87/Db) − 4 .41 1.105
ATHLETES
Resistance tr ained 24 ± 4 Male (5.21/Db) − 4 .78 1.089
35 ± 6 Female (4.97/Db) − 4 .52 1.099
Aerobic endur ance tr ained 21 ± 2 Male (5.03/Db) − 4 .59 1.097
21 ± 4 Female (4.95/Db) − 4 .50 1.100
All sports 18-22 Male (5.12/Db) − 4 .68 1.093
18-22 Female (4.97/Db) − 4 .52 1.099
CLINICAL POPULATIONS
Anorexia nerv osa 15-44 Female (4.96/Db) − 4 .51 1.101
Obesi ty 17-62 Female (4.95/Db) − 4 .50 1.100
Spinal cor d injury (par aplegic or quadriplegic) 18-73 Male (4.67/Db) − 4 .18 1.116
Female (4.70/Db) − 4 .22 1.114
FFB d = fat-free body densi ty; Db = body densi ty; %BF = per cent body f at; NA = no data a vailable f or this population subgr oup.
aMultiply v alue b y 100 to calculate %BF .
bFFB d based on a verage v alues r eported in selected r esear ch articles.
Adapted by permission from A.L. Gibson, D.R. Wagner , and V.H. Heyw ard, Advanced Fitness Assessment and Exercise Prescription ,
9th ed. (Human Kinetics, 2025), 273.
TABLE 14.37  Percent Body Fat Descriptive Data for Athletes in Various
Sports
ClassificationTypical percent body fat of athletes playing the
sport
Sport Males Females
Data f rom D .C. Nieman,  Fitness and Sports Medicine: A Heal th-Related Appr oach, 3rd ed. (B ull Pub. Co., 1995).
853