# Section 14.3

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 14: Administration, Scoring, and Interpretation of Selected Tests

**Section:** 14.3 -- Statistical Evaluation of Test Data

**PDF Pages:** 811--830

FIGURE 14.26  Balance err or scoring system (BES S): (a-c) firm surf ace condi tion and  (d-f) soft surf ace condi tion.
32  STAR EXCURSION BALANCE TEST (SEBT)
Equipment
Adhesiv e tape
Personnel
One r ecorder
Procedure
1. The athlete stands in the center of a grid with eight lines (120 cm [47 in.]) extending out at
45-degr ee incr ements as shown in figure 14.27 (115, 126).
2. The athlete maintains a single-leg stance facing in one direction while reaching with the
contralater al leg as far as possible for each taped line, touching the farthest point possible and
811
then returning  to the bilateral position. Within a single trial, the athlete remains facing in the
beginning direction and the stance leg remains the same, with the other leg doing all of the
reaching.
3. The distance f rom the center of the star to the touch posi tion is measur ed.
4. The starting direction and support leg are chosen randomly . Three trials are performed for
each condi tion and a veraged.
5. A 15-second r est is al lowed between each r each.
6. Trials are discarded if the athlete does not touch the line, lifts the stance foot from the center
grid, loses balance, or does not maintain start and r eturn posi tions f or 1 f ull second.
7. Athletes should be giv en a minimum of f our pr actice trials bef ore being tested (103).
8. It has been suggested that testing the anteromedial, medial, and poster omedial positions is
sufficient f or most si tuations (66).
Note:  Normativ e data for the star excursion balance test are presented in tables 14.20 and 14.21
near the end of the chapter .
FIGURE 14.27  Directions f or the star ex cursion balance test (SEB T).
Reprinted by permission from M.P. Reiman and R.C. Manske, Functional Testing in Human Performance (Human Kinetics, 2009), 109.
Flexibility
  33  SIT-AND-REACH TEST
Note:  A consistent method for the sit-and-r each test should be maintained if the test is done
periodical ly. For example, if the test is performed with a measuring tape or stick during initial
testing of the athlete, all subsequent testing of the athlete should be performed with a measuring
tape or stick (i.e. , a sit-and-r each bo x should not be used instead).
Equipment
Measuring tape or stick
Adhesiv e tape
Permissible al ternativ e: a standar d sit-and-r each bo x
Personnel
One tester/r ecorder
812
Procedure
1. Tape the measuring stick or tape measur e to the floor. Place one piece of tape about 24 inches
(61 cm) long acr oss the measuring stick and at a right angle to i t at the 15-inch (38 cm) mark.
2. Have the athlete warm up with nonbal listic exercises involving the hamstrings and lower back
(e.g., by walking rapidly for 3-5 min); performing several repetitions of flexing forward from a
standing, knees-extended position, reaching toward the toes, then reaching upward toward the
ceiling (all without jerking); jogging in place while trying to kick the heels into the upper thighs
from behind; and finishing wi th standing toe-touching or simi lar str etching on the floor .
3. Have the athlete sit shoeless with the measuring stick between the legs with its zero end
toward the body, the feet 12 inches (30 cm) apart, the toes pointed upward, and the heels
nearly touching the edge of the taped l ine at the 15-inch (38 cm) mark ( figure 14.28a).
4. The athlete slowly reaches forward with both hands as far as possible on the measuring stick,
holding this position moment arily. To get the best stretch, the athlete should exhale and drop
the head between the arms when reaching. Be sure the athlete keeps the hands adjacent to
each other and does not lead with one hand. The fingertips should remain in contact with the
measuring stick (figure 14.28b). The tester may hold the athlete’ s knees down, if necess ary, to
keep them straight. A score of less than 15 inches indicates that the athlete could not reach
the bot tom of the f eet.
5. The best of thr ee trials is r ecorded to the near est 0.25 inch or 1 centimeter .
Note:  Normativ e data for the sit-and-r each test are presented in tables 14.22 through 14.25 near
the end of the chapter .
FIGURE 14.28  (a) Starting posi tion and  (b) final posi tion of the si t-and-r each test.
34  OVERHEAD SQUAT
Equipment
Wooden dowel or barbel l
Personnel
One tester/r ecorder
Procedure
813
1. The athlete holds the wooden dowel overhead with the shoulders fully flexed and with elbows
locked. The grip should be twice shoulder -width using biacromial width as the reference
measur ement point for shoulder width. Biacromial width is the distance between the widest
bony points at the superior portion of both shoulders. The feet are approximately shoulder -
width apart, wi th toes pointing f orward or sl ightly out ( figure 14.29a).
2. The athlete then squats down; the initial action is flexion of the hips and knees. The heels
remain in contact wi th the floor at al l times.
3. The lowering continues unti l the cr ease of the hips is below the top of the knee.
4. The athlete should be able to hold this position with the torso remaining upright (parallel to
the tibia) and the wooden dowel (or barbel l) comf ortably o verhead ( figure 14.29b).
5. The athlete performs a minimum of 5 repetitions, and the tester views the movement from the
side.
6. The assessment is qualitative and the goal is to assess the movement competency , with the
movement scor ed as pass/f ail.
7. It is important that the athlete be warmed up and familiarized with the movement patterns to
increase the test v alidity.
FIGURE 14.29  (a) Starting posi tion and  (b) squat posi tion for the o verhead squat.
Body Composition
814
  35  SKINFOLD MEASUREMENTS
Equipment
Skinfold cal ipers
Flexible tape measur e
Marking pen
Personnel
One tester , one r ecorder
Procedure (Obtaining a Skinfold Measurement)
1. Skinfold measur ements should be made on dry skin, before exercise, to ensur e maximum
validity and reliability (70). The number of sites and equat ions should be selected based on the
population tested (see table 14 .35 near the end of the chapter).
2. Grasp the skin firmly with the thumb and index finger to form a fold of skin and subcutaneous
fat.
3. Place the caliper prongs perpendicular to the fold 0.5 inch to 1 inch (appr oximately 1-2 cm)
from the thumb and index finger .
4. Release the cal iper grip so that i ts spring tension is ex erted on the skinf old.
5. Between 1 and 2 seconds after the grip on the caliper has been released, read the dial on the
caliper to the near est 0.5 mi llimeter .
6. Obtain one measur ement from each test site, and then repeat all test sites for a second trial. If
the measur ements do not differ by more than 10%, average the two measur ements to the
nearest 0.5 millimeter . Other wise, take one or more additional measur ements until two of the
measur ements are within 10%, and average those two measur ements to the nearest 0.5
millimeter .
Procedure (Measuring the Selected Site and Calculating the Body Fat Percentage)
1. There are specific equations for estimating body density (Db) (then, in turn, percent body fat
[%BF]) for different populations. First, select the equation appropriate for the athlete from
table 14 .35 near the end of the chapter .
2. Refer to the chosen equation and related instructions and mark the skin at the appropriate
anatomical si tes (69, 120):
Chest —a diagonal fold one-hal f the distance between the anterior axillary line and the
nipple f or men ( figure 14.30a)
Thigh —a vertical fold on the anterior aspect of the thigh, midw ay between the hip and
knee joints ( figure 14.30b)
Abdomen —a vertical fold 1 inch (2.5 cm) to the right (relative to the athlete) of the
umbilicus ( figure 14.30c)
Triceps —a vertical fold on the poste rior midline of the upper arm (over the triceps muscle),
halfway betwe en the acromion and the olecranon processes (the arm should be in
anatomical posi tion wi th the elbow extended and r elaxed [figure 14.30d])
Suprailium—a diagonal fold above the crest of the ilium at the spot where an imaginary line
would come down from the anterior axillary line (figure 14.30e) (some  prefer the measur e
to be tak en mor e later ally, at the midaxi llary line)
Midaxi lla—a vertical fold on the midaxi llary line at the level of the xiphoid process of the
sternum ( figure 14.30f)
Subscapula —a fold taken on a diagonal line that extends from the vertebr al border to a
point 0.5 inch to 1 inch (1 to 2 cm) f rom the inf erior angle of the scapula ( figure 14.30g)
815
Calf—a vertical fold along the medial side of the calf, at the level of maximum calf
circumference ( figure 14.30h)
3. Using the appropriate popula tion-speci fic equation from table 14.35, calculate the estimated
body densi ty from the skinf olds (61).
4. Enter the body density into the appropriate population-speci fic equation from table 14.36 near
the end of the chapter to calculate the per cent body f at from the body densi ty (69).
5. Note that there are no universally accepted norms for body composi tion. When strength and
condi tioning professionals assess an athlete’ s body composition, they must account for a
standar d error of the estimate (SEE) and report a range of percentages that the athlete falls
into. Note that the minimum SEE for population-speci fic skinfold equations is ±3% to ±5%.
Therefore, if a 25-year-old male athlete’ s body fat is measur ed at 24%, there is a minimum of
a 6% r ange (21%-27%).
Note:  Descriptiv e data for percent body fat are presented in tables 14.22 through 14.25 and table
14.37 near the end of the chapter .
FIGURE 14.30 a Chest skinf old.
816
FIGURE 14.30 b Thigh skinf old.
FIGURE 14.30 c Abdomen skinf old.
817
FIGURE 14.30 d Triceps skinf old.
FIGURE 14.30 e Supr ailium skinf old.
818
FIGURE 14.30 f Midaxi lla skinf old.
FIGURE 14.30 g Subscapula skinf old.
819
FIGURE 14.30 h Cal f skinf old.
36  BIOELECTRICAL IMPEDANCE (BIA)
Equipment
BIA device
Personnel
One r ecorder
Procedure
1. Program the device wi th the athlete’ s sex, weight, and height.
2. Have the athlete either hold the electr odes in the hands or stand barefoot on the electr odes
depending on the t ype of device.
3. Press the start button and wait the specified duration of time for that device (usual ly under 5
seconds).
4. From the measuring device, obtain and r ecord the body composi tion measur ements pr ovided.
5. This means of evaluating body composi tion is best done under similar circumstances. To most
effectively monitor body composi tion changes, it is recommended that testing be done first
thing in the morning before the athlete has exercised, before food or water consumption, and
after ha ving v oided.
Note:  Descriptiv e data for percent body fat are presented in tables 14.22 through 14.25 and table
14.37 near the end of the chapter .
Anthropometry
820
  37  GIRTH MEASUREMENTS
Equipment
Flexible, spring-loaded tape measur e (e.g. , a Gul ick tape)
Personnel
One tester , one r ecorder
Procedure
1. Position the athlete in a relaxed anatomical position for each measur ement (unless otherwise
indicated f or a particular measur ement).
2. Measur e the f ollowing si tes (81); see figure 14.31:
Chest —at nipple level in males and at maximum circumference (above the breasts) in
females
Right upper arm—at the point of maximal circumference with the elbow fully extended,
palm up , and arm abducted to par allel with the floor
Right forearm—at the point of maximal circumference with the elbow fully extended, palm
up, and arm abducted to par allel with the floor
Waist (abdomen) —at the lev el of the umbi licus
Hips (but tocks) —at the maximal pr otrusion of the but tocks wi th the heels together
Right thigh —at the point of maximal cir cumference, usual ly just below the but tocks
Right cal f—at the point of maximal cir cumference between the knee and ankle
FIGURE 14.31  Sites for girth measur ements.
821
Statistical Evaluation of Test Data
Once the pr oper test or tests ha ve been chosen and administer ed and the scor es col lected, the next
step may include any or all of the following: (1) analysis  of the data to determine the change in
performance of the individuals or group over the training period (weeks, months, or years); (2)
analysis of the individual or group’s performance relative to that of similar individuals or groups
tested in the past; (3) analysis of the relationship of each athlete’ s scores to those of the group;
and (4) comparison of individual scor es to local, state, national, or international norms.
An important outcome of repeated performance testing is evaluation of both the improvement of
individual athletes and the overall effectiveness of the physical condi tioning program as determined
by changes in test scores (103). A difference score  is the difference between an athlete’ s score at
the beginning and end of a training period or between any two separ ate testing times. The
percent chan ge is another measure that can be used. Howev er, evaluating the effectiveness of a
training program merely by degree of improvement has two major limitations. First, athletes who
begin the training period at a higher training status will not improve as much as untrained athletes
who perform poorly at the beginning of training (i.e., the principle of diminishing returns ). The
window of adaptation for the various physical capaci ties is typical ly greater for less well-trained
athletes as well as measur es of aerobic fitness (109). Second, athletes may deliberately fail to give
maximal effort on pretraining tests to inflate their pre- to posttraining improvement scores. It is
important to encour age athletes to giv e maximal ef fort on both the pr e- and post training tests.
Types of Statistics
Statistics  is the science of collecting, classifying, analyzing, and interpreting numerical data (27,
145). A working knowledge of statistics is helpful in making sound evaluations of test results.
Within statistics are different branches such as descriptiv e and inferential. Over the years, scientists
and practitioners in strength  and condi tioning have made increasing use of magni tude-based
approaches (through calculation of the effect size), which can be more meaningf ul because they
provide information regarding the magni tude of change that is practical ly meaningf ul to the athlete
in a giv en sport.
Descriptive Statistics
Descriptive statistics  summariz es or describes a large group of data. It is used when all the
information about a population is known. For example, if all the members of a team are tested,
statements can be made about the team with the use of descriptiv e statistics. There are three
categories of numerical measurement in descriptiv e statistics: central tendency , variabi lity, and
percentile rank. In the sections that follow, these terms are defined, and examples of how to
calculate the v alues and scor es are presented.
Central Tend ency  Measur es of central tende ncy are values about which the data tend to
cluster . The thr ee most common measur es of centr al tendency (27 , 145) ar e as f ollows:
Mean —the average of the scores (i.e., the sum of the scores divided by the number of scores).
This is the most commonly used measur e of centr al tendency .
Median —the middlemost score when  a set of scores is arranged in order of magni tude. With an
even number of scores, the median is the average of the two middlemost scores. Half a group of
scores falls above the median  and half falls below the median. Depending on the distribution of
scores, the median can be a better measur e of central tendency than the mean. This is
particularly true when very high or very low scores of one or a few members of the group tested
raise or lower the group mean to the extent that it does not adequately describe the ability of
most gr oup members.
822
Mode —the score that occurs with the greatest frequency . If each numerical score appears only
once, there is no mode. If two or more scores are tied for greatest frequency , all of the similar
scores are modes. The mode is gener ally regarded as the least useful measur e of central
tendency .
Variability  The degree of dispersion of scores within a group is called variability . Two common
measur es of variabi lity are the range  and the standard deviation . The range is the interv al from
the lowest to the highest score. The advantage of the range is that it is easy to understand; the
disadv antage is that it uses only the two extreme scores and so may not be an accurate measur e of
variabi lity (145). For example, the range could be the same for a group of widely dispersed scores
as for a group of scores that are narrowly dispersed except for one deviant score. The standar d
deviation is a measur e of the variabi lity of a set of scores about the mean. The formula for the
standar d deviation of a sample is as f ollows:
SD=∑(x−x¯)2n−1  (14 .1)
where Σ refers to a summation, x is a score, x is the mean of the scores, and n is the sample size
(number of scores). A relatively small standar d deviation  indicates that a set of scores is closely
cluster ed about the mean; a large standar d deviation indicates wider dispersion of the scores about
the mean. The standar d deviation is most useful when the group of scores is “normal ly distributed, ”
forming the bel l-shaped curv e shown in figure 14.32 (26, 67).
The z-score can be used to express the distance of any individual score in standar d deviation
(SD) uni ts from the mean:
  z = (x −  x) / SD    (14.2)
For example, if an athlete runs the 40-yard (37 m) sprint in 4.6 seconds and the mean and
standar d deviation for the group tested are 5.00 and 0.33 seconds, respectiv ely, equation 14.2 can
be applied to determine that the z-score for that athlete is −1.2. In other words, the athlete’ s score
is 1.2 standar d deviation units below (i.e., faster than) the group mean. Graphs can be a useful way
of representing z-scores visual ly. This can provide the strength and condi tioning professional with a
comparison of different physical capaci ties and provide assistance with making decisions on which
weaknesses to target with a training program. In the example shown, the strength and condi tioning
professional may decide to focus on improving endur ance and flexibi lity while also improving body
composi tion ( figure 14.33).
FIGURE 14.32  Normal bel l curv e.
823
FIGURE 14.33 Z-score column chart representing standar dized test scores across different fitness tests for an individual athlete.
The z ero represents the team a verage.
Percentile Rank An individual’ s percentile rank is the percentage of test takers scoring below
that individual . As in calculation of the median, percentile ranking requires arranging scores
ordinally (lowest to highest). For example, if an athlete is ranked in the 75th percentile, 75% of the
group produced scores below  that athlete’ s score. Norms based on large samples are sometimes
expressed in evenly spaced percentiles. Several examples of percentile rank tables are shown in the
tables near the end of the chapter .
Inferential Versus Magnitude Statistics
The use of inferential statistics  allows one to draw gener al conclusions about a population from
information collected in a population sample. For examp le, if a boys’ 9th-gr ade gym class is put
through a battery of tests and it is assumed that the class (sample) is representativ e of all the 9th-
grade boys in the school (the population), the results of these tests can be used to make inferences
about the population as a whole. A basic assumption of inferential statistics is that the sample is
truly r epresentativ e of the population (27).
Magnitude statistics  can provide a more useful approach for practitioners because it allows for
interpr etation of the clinical significance of fitness testing (75). To describe and evaluate the
magni tude of change in a fitness test, measur es such as smallest worth while change and effect size
are important.
Smallest worthwhile change  refers to the ability of a test to detect the smallest practically
important change in performance. The ability to track changes with a fitness test depends on the
validity and reliability of that test. The smallest worth while change can be determined in a number
of ways, but it is typical ly calculated as 0.2 of the between-subjects standar d deviation (75). For
example, if the standar d deviation for a vertical jump test is 10 centimeters in a group of female
athletes, this would mean that the smallest worth while change for this group of athletes is 2
centimeters (0.2 × 10 cm).
824
Effect size is a statistic that can be useful for calculating group performance following a training
program or comparing betwe en groups of athletes (42). The effect of the training program can be
calculated as the difference or change in the mean score as a proportion of the pretest standar d
deviation (equation 14 .3).
ES = (x posttest − x pretest) / SD pretest    (14.3)
For example, a group of athletes had a pretraining mean bench press 1RM of 104.5 kilograms
(standar d deviation of 5.7 kg), and after a 12-week training interv ention the mean bench press is
111.7 kilograms. The calculated ef fect siz e would be equal to (111. 7 − 104 .5) / 5. 7 = 1.26.
Several scales have been provided to compar e the magni tude of the effect (28, 103, 127), but
reference values for small (0.2), moder ate (0.6), large (1.2), and very large (2.0) can be a useful
starting point for practitioners (42, 75). For the example just given, this would mean that the
strength and condi tioning professional would interpr et the effect size of 1.26 as meaning that the
training pr ogram had a lar ge effect.
Developing an Athletic Profile
To determine the sport-speci fic training status of an athlete, the strength and condi tioning
professional can combine the results of selected tests to gener ate an athletic profile , which is a
group of test results related to sport-speci fic abilities that are important for quality performance in a
sport or sport position. When evaluating athletes, the strength and condi tioning professional should
follow these six steps:
1. Select tests that will measur e the specific parameters most closely related to the physical
characteristics of the sport or sports in question. For example, a testing battery for wrestlers
should include tests f or pul ling str ength, pushing str ength, and local muscular endur ance.
2. Choose valid and reliable tests to measur e these parameters, and arrange the testing battery
in an appropriate order with sufficient rest between tests to promote test reliability (see
chapter 13 for more detail). For exampl e, appropriate tests for wrestling might include push-
ups and sit-ups for maximum  repetitions in a given time interv al. These two tests should be
separ ated by at least 10 minutes of rest to allow recovery from fatigue and thus promote
accurate scor es.
3. Administer the test bat tery wi th as man y athletes as possible.
4. Determine the smallest worth while change for the tests and compar e to normativ e data
where appropriate. It is recommended that coaches store testing results and develop their
own norms when standar dized procedur es are used.
5. Conduct repeat testing (e.g., pre- and posttraining program) and use the results to present a
visual pr ofile with figur es.
6. Use the results of the testin g in some meaningf ul way. Ideally, the results will enable the
strength and condi tioning professional to identi fy the strengths and weaknesses of the
athletes and to design the tr aining pr ogram wi th these in mind.
825
Conclusion
Motor abilities and body composi tion variables that can be improved through strength and
condi tioning programs include maximum muscular strength, maximum muscular power , anaer obic
capaci ty, local muscular endur ance, aerobic capaci ty, agility, speed, flexibi lity, girths, percent body
fat, and lean body mass. Performance testing can be used to evaluate basic motor abilities as well
as the improvement of individual athletes over time and the overall effectiveness of a physical
condi tioning program. Numer ous tests are available to measur e sport-speci fic physical capabi lities
and training status. Strength and condi tioning professionals can either use existing normativ e data
to evaluate athletic performance or develop their own normativ e data. Statistical measur es of
central tendency , variabi lity, percentile rank, smallest worthwhile change, effect size, and standar d
scores are useful for evaluating physical abilities and the improvement of a group as well as the
individuals wi thin the gr oup.
KEY TERMS
aerobic capaci ty
aerobic power
agility
anaer obic capaci ty
anaer obic power
anthropometry
artificial intel ligence (AI)
athletic motor ski ll competencies (AMSC)
athletic perf ormance
athletic pr ofile
balance
body composi tion
central tendency
descriptiv e statistics
difference scor e
effect siz e
flexibi lity
functional mo vement scr een (FMS)
high-speed muscular str ength
inferential statistics
local muscular endur ance
low-speed muscular str ength
machine learning (ML)
magni tude statistics
maximal anaer obic muscular power
mean
median
mode
percent change
percentile rank
principle of diminishing r eturns
procedur es
protocols
826
range
reactiv e strength index
smallest worth while change
speed
stability
standar d deviation
statistics
variabi lity
STUDY QUESTIONS
  1.  The maxim al rate of energy production by the combined phosphagen and glycolytic energy
system is known as
  a.  agi lity
  b.  anaer obic capaci ty
  c.  aer obic capaci ty
  d.  maximal str ength
  2.  One of the f ollowing tests is not a test of agi lity or change of dir ection.
  a.  hexagon test
  b.  5-10-5 (pr o agility) test
  c.  T-test
  d.  reactiv e strength index
  3.  Which of the f ollowing is a disqual ification f or the Nor dic hamstring test?
  a.  al lowing hip flexion r ather than maintaining a str aight l ine from the knees to the head
  b.  going too slow
  c.  al lowing the ankles alone to contact the hooks when the athlete is using a dynamometer
  d.  maintaining tight cor e contr ol
  4.  With an even number of scores, the ___________  is the average of the two middlemost
scores. Hal f a gr oup of scor es falls abo ve this, and hal f falls below .
  a.  median
  b.  mode
  c.  average
  d.  variabi lity
  5.  Which of the f ollowing tests is a measur ement of anthr opometry?
  a.  girth measur ements
  b.  body composi tion
  c.  isometric mid-thigh pul l
  d.  1RM power clean
TABLE 14.1  Percentile Values of the 1RM Bench Press, Squat, and Power
Clean in NCAA Division I Female Collegiate Athletes
Percentile*1RM bench press 1RM squat 1RM power clean 1RM bench press 1RM squat
lb kg lb kg lb kg lb kg lb kg
BASKETBALL SWIMMING
*Descriptors for percentiles: 90 = well above average; 70 = above average; 50 = average; 30 = below average; 10 = well below
average
lb = pounds, SD = standar d deviation,  n = sample siz e
Adapted b y permission f rom J. Hoffman, Norms f or Fitness, P erformance, and Heal th (Human Kinetics, 2006), 36-38, 55-58, 113.
827
90 124 56 178 81 130 59 116 53 145 66
80 119 54 160 73 124 56 109 50 135 61
70 115 52 147 67 117 53 106 48 129 59
60 112 51 135 61 112 51 101 46 120 55
50 106 48 129 59 110 50 97 44 116 53
40 102 46 115 52 103 47 94 43 112 51
30 96 44 112 51 96 44 93 42 104 47
20 88 40 101 46 88 40 88 40 101 46
10 82 37 81 37 77 35 78 35 97 44
Mean 105 48 130 59 106 48 98 45 118 54
SD 18 8 42 19 20 9 15 7 19 9
n 120 86 85 42 35
Percentile* SOFTBALL VOLLEYBALL
90 117 53 184 84 122 55 113 51 185 84
80 108 49 170 77 115 52 108 49 171 78
70 104 47 148 67 106 48 104 47 165 75
60 99 45 139 63 100 45 100 45 153 70
50 95 43 126 57 94 43 98 45 143 65
40 90 41 120 55 93 42 96 44 136 62
30 85 39 112 51 88 40 90 41 126 57
20 80 36 94 43 80 36 85 39 112 51
10 69 31 76 35 71 32 79 36 98 45
Mean 94 43 130 59 97 44 97 44 144 65
SD 18 8 42 19 20 9 14 6 33 15
n 105 97 80 67 62
*Descriptors for percentiles: 90 = well above average; 70 = above average; 50 = average; 30 = below average; 10 = well below
average
lb = pounds, SD = standar d deviation,  n = sample siz e
Adapted b y permission f rom J. Hoffman, Norms f or Fitness, P erformance, and Heal th (Human Kinetics, 2006), 36-38, 55-58, 113.
TABLE 14.2  Percentile Values of the 1RM Bench Press, Squat, and Power
Clean in High School and College American Football Players
Percentile*1RM bench press 1RM squat1RM power
clean 1RM bench press 1RM squat1RM power
clean
lb kg lb kg lb kg lb kg lb kg lb kg
HIGH SCHOOL 14-15 YEARS HIGH SCHOOL 16-18 YEARS
90 243 110 385 175 213 97 275 125 465 211 250 114
*Descriptors for percentiles: 90 = well above average; 70 = above average; 50 = average; 30 = below average; 10 = well
below a verage
**Hof fman 2006 r eported 365 lb (166 kg) f or the 40% r ank of the NCAA DIII 1RM squat.
lb = pounds, SD = standar d deviation,  n = sample siz e.
Adapted by permission from J. Hoffman, Norms for Fitness, Performance, and Health (Human Kinetics, 2006), 36-38, 55-
58, 113.
828
80 210 95 344 156 195 89 250 114 425 193 235 107
70 195 89 325 148 190 86 235 107 405 184 225 102
60 185 84 305 139 183 83 225 102 365 166 223 101
50 170 77 295 134 173 79 215 98 335 152 208 95
40 165 75 275 125 165 75 205 93 315 143 200 91
30 155 70 255 116 161 73 195 89 295 134 183 83
20 145 66 236 107 153 70 175 80 275 125 165 75
10 125 57 205 93 141 64 160 73 250 114 145 66
Mean 179 81 294 134 176 80 214 97 348 158 204 93
SD 45 20 73 33 32 15 44 20 88 40 43 20
n 214 170 180 339 249 284
Percentile* NCAA DI NCAA DIII
90 370 168 500 227 300 136 365 166 470 214
80 345 157 455 207 280 127 325 148 425 193
70 325 148 430 195 270 123 307 140 405 184
60 315 143 405 184 261 119 295 134 385 175
50 300 136 395 180 252 115 280 127 365 166
40 285 130 375 170 242 110 273 124 350** 159**
30 270 123 355 161 232 105 255 116 335 152
20 255 116 330 150 220 100 245 111 315 143
10 240 109 300 136 205 93 225 102 283 129
Mean 301 137 395 180 252 115 287 130 375 170
SD 53 24 77 35 38 17 57 26 75 34
n 1,189 1,074 1,017 591 588
*Descriptors for percentiles: 90 = well above average; 70 = above average; 50 = average; 30 = below average; 10 = well
below a verage
**Hof fman 2006 r eported 365 lb (166 kg) f or the 40% r ank of the NCAA DIII 1RM squat.
lb = pounds, SD = standar d deviation,  n = sample siz e.
Adapted by permission from J. Hoffman, Norms for Fitness, Performance, and Health (Human Kinetics, 2006), 36-38, 55-
58, 113.
TABLE 14.3  Percentile Values of the 1RM Bench Press, Squat, and Power
Clean in NCAA Division I Male Baseball and Basketball Athletes
Percentile*1RM bench press 1RM squat 1RM power clean 1RM bench press 1RM squat1RM power
clean
lb kg lb kg lb kg lb kg lb kg lb kg
BASEBALL BASKETBALL
90 273 124 365 166 265 120 269 122 315 143 250 114
*Descriptors for percentiles: 90 = well above average; 70 = above average; 50 = average; 30 = below average; 10 = well
below a verage
lb = pounds, SD = standar d deviation,  n = sample siz e.
Adapted by permission from J. Hoffman, Norms for Fitness, Performance, and Health (Human Kinetics, 2006), 36-38, 55-
58, 113.
829
80 260 118 324 147 239 109 250 114 305 139 235 107
70 247 112 310 141 225 102 240 109 295 134 230 105
60 239 109 293 133 216 98 230 105 280 127 220 100
50 225 102 270 123 206 94 225 102 265 120 215 98
40 218 99 265 120 200 91 216 98 245 111 205 93
30 203 92 247 112 190 86 210 95 225 102 195 89
20 194 88 237 107 182 83 195 89 195 89 180 82
10 175 80 218 99 162 74 185 84 166 75 162 74
Mean 227 103 281 128 210 95 225 102 251 114 209 95
SD 41 19 57 26 36 16 33 15 57 26 34 15
n 170 176 149 142 131 122
*Descriptors for percentiles: 90 = well above average; 70 = above average; 50 = average; 30 = below average; 10 = well
below a verage
lb = pounds, SD = standar d deviation,  n = sample siz e.
Adapted by permission from J. Hoffman, Norms for Fitness, Performance, and Health (Human Kinetics, 2006), 36-38, 55-
58, 113.
TABLE 14.4  1RM Squat, Bench Press, Power Clean, and Bench Pull
Descriptive Data* for Various Groups
Group, sport, or positionNumber
of
athletesBody weight Squat Bench press Power clean Bench pull
lb kg lb kg lb kg lb kg lb kg
Group, sport, or positionNumber
of
athletesBody weight Squat Bench press Power clean Bench pull
lb kg lb kg lb kg lb kg lb kg
National rugb y league (7) 20 216.5
± 21.898.2 ±
9.9385.8
± 59.5175.0
± 27.3
State-lev el rugb y league (7) 20 201.2
± 18.591.3 ±
8.4329.8
± 30.9149.6
± 14.3
National rugb y league (8) 21 219.4
± 19.299.5 ±
8.7315.0
± 33.5142.7
± 15.2
State-lev el rugb y league (8) 21 200.0
± 19.690.7 ±
8.9258.8
± 35.9117.4
± 16.3
National rugb y league (5) 6 211.2
± 32.295.8 ±
14.6332.5
± 2.6150.8
± 10. 7
National sai ling—men (119) 11 215.6
± 27.697.8 ±
12.5310.6
± 58.6140.9
± 26.6265.9
± 37.3120.6
± 16.9
National
canoe/r owing/wr estling/judo—
men (129)75 167.6
± 19.476.0 ±
8.8199.0
± 35.990.3 ±
16.3176.8
± 26.080.2 ±
11.8
National bask etball—women
(140)12 166.7
± 32.275.6 ±
14.6173.2
± 6.678.6 ±
3.0
NCAA Division IA col lege
footbal l—men (17)963 310.4 140.8
NCAA Division IA col lege
footbal l—men (17)560 420.6 190.8
*The v alues l isted ar e means ± standar d deviation. The data should be r egarded as only descriptiv e, not normativ e.
830