# Section 14.1

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 14: Administration, Scoring, and Interpretation of Selected Tests

**Section:** 14.1 -- Measuring Parameters of Athletic Performance

**PDF Pages:** 764--785

CHAPTER  14
ADMINISTRATION, SCORING, AND
INTERPRETATION OF SELECTED TESTS
David J. Heikkinen, PhD, Jo Clubb, MS, and John McMahon, PhD
The authors would like to acknowledge the significant contributions of Michael McGuigan, Everett Harman, and John Garhammer
to this chapter .
After completing this chapter, you will be able to
discern the best w ays to measur e selected par ameters r elated to athletic perf ormance;
administer field tests appr opriately;
evaluate and analyz e test data and mak e normativ e comparisons;
understand appr opriate statistics; and
combine the r esults of selected tests to gener ate an athletic pr ofile.
As discussed in chapter 13, the strength and condi tioning professional—often referred to as the
tester  in this chapte r—who has a broad understanding of exercise science can effectively choose
and use tests and measur ements to make training program decisions that help athletes optimiz e
their physical preparation and maximiz e their potential.  To do this effectively, the tester must
administer tests correctly, analyze test data accurately (or understand how test data have been
analyz ed if the tester is not responsible for this, such as when using proprietary softw are), and then
combine the results of selecte d tests to gener ate an athlet ic profile. This chapter covers these basic
aspects of testing performance-r elated parameters and provides compr ehensiv e age- and sport-
specific descriptiv e and normativ e data f or selected tests.
764
Measuring Parameters of Athletic Performance
Athleticism incorporates many physical abilities, some of which are much more amenable to training
than others. Such abilities may be called gener al components of athletic perfo rmance —that is,
abilities that enable effective responses to the various physical demands of a specific sport or
event. This section f ocuses on how each component can be tested and highl ights r elevant issues.
Maximum Muscular Strength (Low-Speed Strength)
Maximum muscular strength tests can be split into dynamic or isometric demands; those that
involve relatively low movement speeds reflect low-speed muscular strength . In this case,
muscular strength is related to the force a muscle or muscle group can exert in one maximal effort
while maintaining proper form, and it can be quanti fied by the maximum weight that can be lifted
once (the 1-repetition maximum [1RM]) in exercises such as the bench press or back squat, or the
maximum force that can be exerted at a particular isokinetic velocity (5, 6, 45, 72, 100, 101, 103,
109, 124). Because 1RM tests do not require expensiv e equipment and reflect the kind of dynamic
ability necessary in sport, they are the maximal strength tests of choice for most strength and
condi tioning pr ofessionals.
In general, 1RM tests are administer ed after the athlete has warmed up by performing a few
sets of the test exercise with submaximal loads, beginn ing with a relatively light load. The first
attempt is usually with approximately 50% of the athlete’ s estimated 1RM weight. After the athlete
has rested enough to feel recovered from the previous attempt (1-5 min, depending on the
difficulty of the attempt), the strength and condi tioning professional increases the weight
somewhat, based on the ease with which the previous trial was performed. A skilled strength and
condi tioning professional should, within three to five attempts following warm-up , be able to find
the athlete’ s 1RM load to wi thin a f ew per centage points of the true v alue.
While testing the athlete’ s 1RM is a time-tested and reliable way to assess maximal strength,
many strength and condi tioning professionals have begun to use isometric tests to more
compr ehensiv ely assess the athlete’ s maximal force production capaci ties (5, 6, 19, 29, 45, 72, 100,
101, 103, 124). These types of tests are particularly appealing because they are nonfatiguing and
are often integr ated into an athlete’ s regular training program (i.e., training is testing). Typical ly
administer ed with the use of a force plate (or pair of force plates) or force cell that is integr ated
into a custom testing device,  these tests allow for the gener ation of a force–time curve that can be
used to quanti fy the rate at which force is produced as well as the maximum force exerted against
an immovable object (e.g., bar) (29, 92). Regardless of the isometric testing device used, these
tests are performed after a suitable warm-up , often progressing from 50% effort to 90% before
performing thr ee maximum isometric trials that ar e perf ormed f or 3- to 5-second dur ation (29, 59).
Given that strength is highly influenced by body mass, expressing maximum muscular strength
test results relative to body weight is valuable. Ratio standards can be used to determine relative
strength (43) by dividing the weight lifted (in a dynamic test) or force produced (in an isometric
test) by the athlete’ s body weight. Relative strength from a 1RM test can be expressed as the total
weight lifted (lb or kg) divided  by body mass (lb or kg). To express the same from an isometric test,
maximal force exerted in newtons is divided by bodyweight converted into newtons (lb × 4.44, or
kg × 9.81). Ratio scaling allows comparisons between athletes normal ized to body weight.
Howev er, this simple approach assumes that strength is directly proportional to body mass (43),
which is not necessari ly the case. Therefore, allometri c scaling has also been recommended,
particularly in settings with wide variation in body size and strength. Dividing strength by body
mass raised to an appropriate power can eliminate the effects of body mass, although debate
remains r egarding the most appr opriate scal ing exponents (33, 43, 83).
765
Anaerobic or Maximum Muscular Power (High-Speed
Strength)
High-speed muscular strength  or maximal anaerobic muscular power  (or anaerobic
power ) is related to the ability of muscle tissue to exert high force while contracting at a high
speed. Tests of strength and power are of very short duration, are performed at maximal
movement speeds, and produce very high-power outputs. High-speed maximal muscular power
tests are often called (maximal) anaerobic power tests. Scores on high-speed muscular strength
tests include the 1RM of explosive exercises (e.g., the power clean, snatch, push jerk), the height
of a vertical jump, and the time to sprint up a staircase (e.g., Margaria-K alamen test) (69, 100, 103,
124, 126). Because explosiv e exercise tests take about 1 second while low-speed maximal strength
tests generally require 2 to 5 seconds to complete, phosphocr eatine and adenosine triphosphate
(ATP) stored in the active muscle(s) are the primary energy sources for both types of tests.
Maintaining correct technique or form is also important when measuring anaer obic power for both
performance v alidity and saf ety reasons.
Most maximal muscular strength tests involve relatively slow movement speeds
and therefore reflect low-speed strength. Assessment of high-speed muscular
strength can involve measuring the 1RM of explos ive resistance training exercises
or the height of a vertical jump.
Power output reflects the interpla y between force and velocity. The height of a jump is a function
of the force applied to the ground that is greater than the athlete’ s body weight over the time it
was applied (this is referred to as net impulse ) while he or she extends the ankles, knees, and hips
to propel upward. A larger net impulse (force × time) leads to a higher velocity at which the athlete
leaves the ground. An athlete may not improve in jump height after gaining body weight during a
resistance training cycle, making it appear that power output is unchanged. Howev er, because the
athlete is heavier and propels the body to the same height, indicating the same takeoff velocity, an
increase in power output is likely. This applies to any test in which body weight is manipulated
(e.g., running up stairs). Moving a heavier body at the same speed requires a higher power output.
It is up to the strength and condi tioning professional to interpret the interpla y between changes in
body weight, velocity, and power output accordingly , because for some athletes, such as those from
collision-based sports, gains in absolute power through weight gain may be beneficial, but for
athletes who benefi t primari ly from moving at high absolu te velocities, a reduction in velocity owing
to weight gain ma y be detrimental.
An alternativ e class of anaer obic power tests involves the use of a cycle ergometer . This type of
test can be advantageous for the strength and condi tioning professional in some injury situations in
which running is restricted or when the athlete participates in a non-bodyweight -support sport such
as rowing or cycling. The most commonly used test of this type is the Wingate anaer obic test. A
field test protocol involves use of a cycle ergometer with mechanical means of adjusting resistance
and measuring  pedal revolutions (i.e., revolutions per second). In a laboratory setting, an
electr onical ly instrumented ergometer can simplify parameter measur ement and improve accuracy.
Typical protocols involve a basic warm-up followed by a 30-second test interv al (39). In this test,
resistance is applied quickly after the individual reaches a near-maximal pedal ing rate (typical ly 90-
110 rpm). The resistance applied is proportional to body weight (e.g., 7.5%); the percentage is
greater for trained athletes than for individuals with less training. Work performed is determined
from the resistance value and number of pedal revolutions. Power is gener ally calculated as work
divided by time for each 5-second time interv al during the 30-second test. Parameters typical ly
766
calculated include peak power , average power , and a fatigue index such as a ratio of maximum to
minimum interv al power . Norms f or cycle er gometer tests ar e available (71, 103).
Load-Velocity Profile
Velocity-based training (VBT) using commer cially available technology has become an increasingly
popular metho d for measuring bar speed and displacement during the performance of individual
resistance training exercises. These technologies allow testers to measur e the intensi ty of an
exercise using bar velocity as a metric rather than simply using percentages of a 1RM (15, 156).
These methods are based on the inverse relationship between bar speed and the weight lifted.
Specifically, as the absolute weight on the bar increases, a linear decrease in bar velocity is typical ly
recorded. Using this knowledge, strength and condi tioning professionals can create an
individual ized load– velocity profile by performing a series of sets performed with progressively
increasing loads (i.e., 20%, 40%, 60%, 80%, and 90% of 1RM) (156). The creation of the load–
velocity profile has been suggested to be useful for evaluating and prescribing exercise intensi ty
during resistan ce training programs and has also been suggested to be a useful tool for estimating
or monitoring the 1RM. When the load– velocity profile is created from a series of increasing loads
as a percentage of the 1RM with the back squat exercise (figure 14.1) a linear relationship exists
between load and velocity (14). Howev er, when the 1RM back squat is estimated from the load–
velocity profile, it is highly variable and consistently results in an overestimation of the athlete’ s
1RM and should not be used for 1RM prediction (56, 89). When the current body of scienti fic
knowledge is examined using the load– velocity profile to predict the 1RM on a day-to-da y basis, it
may result in the mispr ogramming of training loads and, in some instances, the programming of
loads that exceed the athlete’ s capaci ties (14, 56, 60). As such, it is gener ally recommended that
the 1RM should be directly tested when seeking to determine an athlete’ s maximal strength in a
given ex ercise, and the load– velocity profile should not be used to estimate the 1RM (56, 89).
Anaerobic Capacity
Anaerobic capacity  is the maxima l rate of energy production by the combined phosphagen and
anaer obic glycolytic energy systems for moder ate-dur ation activities. It is typical ly quanti fied as the
maximal power output during muscular activity between 30 and 90 seconds using a variety of tests
for the upper and lower body (39, 103, 124, 151), as opposed to maximal anaer obic power tests,
which last no longer than a f ew seconds.
Local Muscular Endurance
Local muscular endurance  is the ability of certain muscles or muscle groups to perform repeated
contractions against a submaximal resistance (18, 103). A test of local muscular endur ance should
be performed in a continuous manner for several seconds to several minutes without the advantage
of rest periods and without extraneous body movements. Examples include performing a maximal
number of repetitions of the chin-up , parallel bar dip, or push-up exercises or a resistance training
exercise using a fixed load (e.g., a percentage of an athlete’ s 1RM or body weight) (38, 46, 94, 100,
103).
Aerobic Capacity
Aerobic capacity , also called aerobic power , is the maximum rate at which an athlete can
produce energy through oxidation of energy sources (carboh ydrates, fats, and proteins) and is
usually expressed as a volume of oxygen consumed per kilogram of body weight per minute (i.e.,
mL · kg−1 · min−١ )(95). Few strength and condi tioning professionals have the equipment to
measur e oxygen consumption  directly, so aerobic capaci ty is gener ally estimated by performance in
aerobic endur ance activities such as running 1 mile (1.6 km) or more (69, 111, 120). It can also be
767
estimated using other field tests such as the maximal aerobic speed (MAS) test (87) and the Yo-Yo
intermi ttent r ecovery test (10, 18, 85, 86).
768
769
FIGURE 14.1  Load– velocity profiling.
Reprinted by permission from H.G. Banyard, K. Nosaka, and G.G. Haff, “Reliability and Validity of the Load-Velocity Relationship to Predict the 1RM Back Squat,” The
Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research 31, no. 7 (2017): 1897-1904.
Agility
Agility  traditional ly has been consider ed the ability to stop, start, and change the direction of the
whole body rapidly (134, 143). Agility consists of two main components: speed in changing
direction and cogni tive factors (134). The defini tion of agility has been revised to take into account
the perceptual qualities, and it is now consider ed “a rapid, whole-body , change of direction or
speed in response to a sports-speci fic stimulus” (134, 143). Agility testing therefore involves tests
of change of direction with a cogni tive component, such an anticipation and reaction. Tests such as
the T-test, the 5-0-5 test, the 5-10-5 test (also known as the pro agility test), and the L-drill (also
known as the 3-cone dri ll) are used to assess change of dir ection.
Speed
Speed  is movement distance per unit of time and is typical ly quantified as the time taken to cover
a fixed distanc e. The time taken to sprint from a stationary start over a short distance such as 10
yards or meters reflects acceleration, whereas longer sprints such as 40 yards (37 m) would
measur e maxim um speed (163). Tests of speed are not usually conducted over distances greater
than 100 meters (109 yd) because longer distances reflect anaer obic or aerobic capaci ty more than
absolute abi lity to mo ve the body at maximal speed (103, 124 , 163).
Electr onic timing devices are becoming more accessible to strength and condi tioning
professionals due to increased ease of use and lower prices. Howev er, many tests of speed and
agility are administer ed using hand timing with a stopw atch, which can be a major source of
measur ement error, especial ly if the tester is not sufficiently trained. Even under ideal condi tions,
stopw atch-measur ed sprint times are up to 0.24 seconds faster than electr onical ly measur ed times
because of the tester ’s reaction-time delay in pressing the stopw atch button at the gun and the
tendency to anticipate and press the button early as the athlete approaches the finish line (45, 67,
125). Therefore, strength and condi tioning professionals are encour aged to use electr onic timing
devices for tests of speed and agility when they are available. It is also more informativ e to
measur e split times, because this can provide the strength and condi tioning professional with
insight into the speed and acceleration capaci ties of the athletes. For example, times for 10 yards
(9 m), 20 yards (18 m), and 40 yards (37 m) can be recorded and used to calculate split times and
maximal v elocity. Final ly, tests of speed and agi lity require proper f ootwear and a nonsl ip surf ace.
Athletic Motor Skill C ompetency
Developing movement skills that enable children and adolescents to move in an effective and
efficient manne r during physical activity and sport is central to long-term athletic development. The
athletic moto r skill competencies  (AMSC), proposed by Lloyd and colleagues (90), presents
foundational movement skills that underpin athletic movements. The AMSC and examples of
associated movement screening exercises are presented in figure 14.2 and can be used to monitor
the development of young athletes (123). The use of the AMSC and other screening tools provide a
method for tracking athlete development with the use of various assessment tools that evaluate
movement patterns and other qualitative aspects of movement. As such, these types of tools are
best described as process-oriented assessments (150). Overall, the use of movement screening
information can be used by practitioners to identi fy strength, mobility, and neuromuscular deficits,
which can then guide pr ogramming decisions.
770
FIGURE 14.2  Athletic motor ski ll competencies and examples of associated mo vement scr een ex ercises.
Adapted from Lloyd and Oliver (2020); Pullen et al. (2022).
Assessing movement patterns can reveal indicators of injury susceptibi lity in young athletes.
Well-establ ished screening tools such as the functional movement screen (FMS) , tuck jump
assessment (TJA), landing error scoring system, and drop jump assessments are commonly used
for this purpose (123). Additional ly, tailored movement screening protocols have been devised
specific to particular sports, aiming to pinpoint injury risks, performance limitations, or even talent
identi fication opportuni ties. Tailored training programs can be developed by strength and
condi tioning professionals to target specific individual needs, including addressing movement
limitations.
Multiple movement screens assess parts of the AMSC spectrum, but consensus has not been
reached regarding which are most appropriate for a given cohort. One narrative review (122)
included 10 movement screens, including but not limited to the FMS, TJA, resistance training skills
battery (RTSB), and back squat assessment (BSA). Interested readers are directed to the review by
Pullen and colleagues (122) for more detailed information on the methodologies, reliabilities, and
strengths and limitations of each of these tests when selecting the screening test that is the most
appropriate f or the en vironment.
771
Implementing movement screens can be complex due to variations in implementation practices,
criteria, grading, and movement analysis. Understandin g reliability of screen implementers is
critical, althoug h both novice and expert raters can achieve substantial reliability (104). Recording
movements for retrospectiv e analysis after testing is recommended, because it allows raters to
review video footage, pause, slow down, and rewatch to accurately assess movements. The
number of repetitions performed and how they are graded are crucial. Due to ongoing brain
matur ation, youth exhibi t higher movement variabi lity, and performance regressions can coincide
with growth spurts (54, 68). Therefore, movement screens should assess each repetition for
consistency . Some screens, such as the FMS and RTSB, use a best repetition technique, which limits
the assessment of movemen t consistency . Others, like the TJA, use a sum-of -repetition scoring
system, capturing movement variabi lity. Considering total body versus segmental analysis is also
important because total body approaches like the FMS may miss specific deficiencies or
compensations, wher eas segmental analysis pr ovides detai led insights (123).
Flexibility
Flexibility  can be defined as the range of motion about a body joint (13). Typical devices for
measuring flexibility include manual and electric goniome ters, which measur e joint angle, and the
sit-and-r each box, which is used to evaluate the combined flexibi lity of the lower back and hips.
Flexibi lity measurements are more reliable when standar dized warm-up and static stretching
precede the flexibi lity assessm ent. During a flexibi lity test, the athlete should move slowly into the
fully stretched  position and hold this position. Ballistic stretching, characteriz ed by bouncing to
increase r ange of motion, cannot be al lowed during an y flexibi lity testing (69, 116).
A number of movement competency screens are available for strength and condi tioning
professionals and can be used to assess overall flexibi lity, mobility, and gener al movement
competency of athletes. Howev er, there is no current consensus on which screen to use, nor a
clearly establ ished link between movement screening results and injury (98, 116). Competent
strength and condi tioning professionals perform postur al and performance screening routinely by
viewing the athletes’ performance in training. For exam ple, the overhead squat is a common
exercise that is used as a part of movement screens because it allows assessment of bilateral
mobility of the hips, knees, and ankles along wi th the shoulder and thor acic spine (3, 25, 126).
Balance and Stability
Balance  is the ability to maintain static and dynamic equilibrium  or the ability to maintain the
body’s center of gravity over its base of support (103, 124). Stability  is a measur e of the ability to
return to a desired position following a postur al disturbance (103). Athletes with poor balance are
at a greater risk of lower limb injuries (76, 77, 96). Athletes have also been shown to have greater
balance compa red to nonathletes (38). Balance testing can be used to assess stability increases
with training and in a numbe r of different ways (103). Commonly used tests include timed static
standing tests (eyes closed and standing on one or both legs) (21, 101), balance tests using
unstable surfaces (101), and tests using special ized balance testing equipment (e.g., NeuroCom,
Biodex Balance System) (124). These include a large number of tests that can evaluate different
aspects of balance and stability (103). The balance error scoring system (BESS) and star excursion
balance test (SEBT) have very good reliability and a substantial body of literature supporting their
use (21, 57 , 66, 103, 115, 146).
Body Composition
Body composition  usually refers to the relative proportions by weight of fat and lean tissue.
Although there are sophisticated and expensiv e devices capable of partitioning the lean component
into bone and soft tissue, the body composi tion procedur es typical ly performed by strength and
772
condi tioning professionals use the basic two-component (fat and lean mass) model. With a trained
and competent tester , the skinfold measur ement technique is the most valid and reliable (r = 0.99)
means for assessing body fatness that is gener ally available to the strength and condi tioning
professional and is preferable to body circumference methods (95). Other methods available to
strength and condi tioning professionals include bioimpedance devices and total body
plethysmogr aphy, although dual X -ray absorptiometry (D XA) is often labeled as a gold standar d.
The skinfold method uses calipers that measur e the thickness of a double layer of finger -pinched
skin and subcutaneous fat. A good skinfold measur emen t device should squeez e the fold of skin
and fat with constant pressure regardless of the amount of tissue being measur ed (41, 69, 120).
Circumference methods may be added, becaus e they are relatively quick and simple and can yield
important chronic disease risk information. For example, waist circumference can assess abdominal
fat, and a high waist circumference is associated with an increased risk for type 2 diabetes, high
cholester ol, high blood pr essure, and certain t ypes of car diac disease (69).
Anthropometry
Anthropometry , which is the science of measur ement applied to the human body, gener ally
includes measu rements of height, weight, and selected body girths (69). Ideally, height should be
measur ed with a stadiometer . If a stadiometer is not available, measur ement of height requires a
flat wall against which the athlete stands, with a measuring tape attached or unattached to the
wall. Height is usual ly measur ed wi thout shoes to the near est quarter -inch or hal f-centimeter (103).
The most accurate body mass or body weight measur ement is performed with a certified balance
scale, which is gener ally more reliable than a spring scale and should be calibrated on a regular
basis (103). A calibrated electr onic scale is an acceptable alternativ e. Athletes should be weighed
while wearing minimal dry clothing (e.g., workout shorts  and T-shirt, no shoes). For comparison
measur ements at a later date, they should dress similarly and be weighed at the same time of day.
The most reliable body mass measur ements are made in the morning upon rising, after elimination
and before ingestion of food or fluids. Level of hydration can result in variabi lity of body mass
(weight). Thus, athletes should be encour aged to avoid eating salty food (which increases water
retention) the da y before weighing and to go to bed normal ly hydrated.
The most reliable girth measur ements are usually obtaine d with the aid of a flexible measuring
tape equipped with a spring-loaded attachment at the end that, when pulled out to a specified
mark, exerts a fixed amount of tension on the tape. Girth measur ements should be made at the
beginning of a tr aining period f or comparison wi th subsequent measur ements (69, 103).
773
Monitoring Protocols, Procedures, and Equipment
When selecting tests for athletic assessment, it is crucial to consider the protocols, procedur es, and
equipment necessary to effectively implement them. Every athletic environment is unique, requiring
careful consider ation to optimiz e these aspects f or speci fic set tings.
Protocols  are systematic plans outlining guidel ines to achiev e specific objectiv es. In athlete
testing, they provide a compr ehensiv e framework within which procedur es are developed, setting
standar ds for consistency , reliability, and validity (as explained in detail in chapter 13). A monitoring
protocol represents the overarching strategy for conducting performance assessments, detailing the
overall approach for tracking an athlete’ s physical capaci ties and specifying test types and
frequencies thr oughout the season.
Using Artificial Intelligence to Analyze Testing Data
Artificial intellige nce (AI) has emerged as a potential ly transformative tool in sport. Yet there is still much confusion,
apprehension, and skepticism about the value of AI. AI is defined as “the ability of a digital computer to perform tasks
commonly associated with intelligent beings … such as the ability to reason, discover meaning, gener alize, or learn from
past experience” (31). Within AI, machine learning  (ML)  is the ability of computer machines to learn from and develop
data without human input or interaction. These approaches offer various advantages to sport, including automating or
semiautomating data collection, processing data into meaningf ul insights, identifying crucial information related to health
and performance, and creating models  that support complex decision making  (40). Such models can handle a vast number
of factors and their inter actions, which can be too complex f or humans to pr ocess.
In the context of athlete testing, AI holds numer ous potential applications. Its capaci ty to process large volumes of data
is particularly suited to biomechanical analysis, leading to its integr ation into a number of movement analysis solutions (12).
Moreover, AI can be used to streamline certain technologies and tests, making jump, speed, and velocity-based gym
exercise assessments feasible with just a mobile phone (9). By leveraging the quality of modern phone camer as and
applying AI and ML techniques to analyze the data, such tests become accessible to more strength and condi tioning
professionals. Howev er, it is crucial f or practitioners to scrutiniz e the ac curacy and v alidity of such technologies.
The use of AI in injury prediction is a widely debated subject (12), yet its potential to enhance existing approaches
cannot be overlook ed. The ability of AI and ML to process vast quanti ties of data and compr ehend complex interactions
within and across data sets may further such applications. Nevertheless, practitioners must ensur e sufficient data collection
quanti ty and quality. As the maxim “garbage in, garbage out” implies, the success of any model is contingent on the quality
of its inputs. AI’s application in analyzing athlete testing data is a burgeoning  field that holds promise for the future. Given
its rapid and constant ev olution, i t is imper ative that pr actitioners sta y informed of dev elopments in this ar ea.
Procedures  are detailed, step-b y-step instructions on executing specific tasks within the
protocol framework. They provide explicit guidance on methods to ensur e consistent data
collection. In physical performance assessments, procedur es detail the steps for conducting the
tests outlined in this chapter , such as vertical jumps, aerobic capaci ty, or agility performance,
ensuring standar dized methodologies and r eliable data.
Selecting appropriate equipm ent for athlete physical performance tests can be challenging due to
the wide range of tools and technologies now available. A decision-making framework for
implementing technology in sport (159) suggests f our reflectiv e questions:
1. Would the inf ormation pr ovided be helpf ul?
2. Can y ou trust the inf ormation pr ovided?
3. Can y ou integr ate, manage, and analyz e the data pr ovided ef fectively?
4. Can y ou implement the technology in y our pr actice?
Selecting suitable technology involves ensuring device  validity and reliability, considering
practical ity and ease of use, and confirming relevance to athletes and their specific sport. This
compr ehensiv e approach ensur es that the assessments are accurate, relevant, and actionable,
supporting athlete perf ormance and r educed risk of injury .
774
In summary , considering protocols, procedur es, and equipment prior to commencement of
testing is essential. Regularly reviewing these aspects ensures testing batteries remain consistent,
relevant, and ef fective for athletes’ tr aining pr ograms.
SELECTED TEST PROTOCOLS AND SCORING DATA
MAXIMUM MUSCULAR STRENGTH (LOW-SPEED STRENGTH)
  1  1RM B ench Pr ess  304
  2  1RM B ench Pul l  304
  3  1RM B ack S quat   305
MAXIMUM MUSCULAR POWER (HIGH-SPEED STRENGTH)
  4  Isometric Mid- Thigh Pul l  305
  5  Nordic Hamstring T est  307
  6  1RM P ower Clean   308
  7  Standing Long (B road) Jump   308
  8  Vertical Jump   308
  9  Squat Jump (Static V ertical Jump)   311
10  Drop Jump   312
11  Rebound Jump   313
12  Margaria-K alamen T est  314
13  Velocity-Based T esting (VB T)  315
ANAEROBIC CAPACITY
14  300-Yard (274 m) Shut tle Run  316
15  90-Second B ox Jump T est  317
LOCAL MUSCULAR ENDURANCE
16  Partial Curl-Up   318
17  Push-Up   319
18  Army Fitness T est (AF T) Hand-R elease Push-Up (HRP)   320
19  YMCA B ench Pr ess Test  321
AEROBIC CAPACITY
20  1.5-Mi le (2.4 km) R un  321
21  12-Minute R un  321
22  Yo-Yo Intermi ttent R ecovery Test  322
23  Maximal Aer obic Speed T est  323
24  30-15 I ntermi ttent Fi tness T est (IF T)  323
CHANGE OF DIRECTION OR AGILITY
25  T-Test  324
26  Hexagon T est  325
27  5-10-5 T est  326
28  5-0-5 T est  326
775
29  Illinois T est  327
SPEED
30  Straight-Line Sprint T ests  327
BALANCE AND STABILITY
31  Balance Err or Scoring S ystem (BES S)  328
32  Star Ex cursion B alance T est (SEB T)  329
FLEXIBILITY
33  Sit-and-R each T est  330
34  Overhead S quat   331
BODY COMPOSITION
35  Skinfold Measur ements   332
36  Bioelectrical I mpedance (BIA)   334
ANTHROPOMETRY
37  Girth Measur ements   334
Maximum Muscular Strength (Low-Speed Strength)
  1  1RM BENCH PRESS
Equipment
A barbel l, weight plates, and two safety locks; enough total weight to accommodate the
maximum load of the strongest athlete; and a variety of plate sizes to allow for 5-pound (2.3
kg) gr adations in weight
A stur dy bench pr ess bench wi th integr al bar r ack (pr eferably of adjustable height)
Personnel
One spot ter, one r ecorder
Procedure
1. Instruct the athlete in proper technique for the flat barbel l bench press as described in chapter
16.
2. The spotter stands at the head end of the bench throughout the test to help in raising the bar
on a f ailed at tempt and to help the athlete place the bar back on the r ack.
3. As with any maximal strength test, the athlete first does a specific warm-up of 5 to 10
repetitions wi th a light to moder ate load.
4. Usual ly, at least two heavier warm-up sets of 2 to 5 repetitions each are completed before the
first actual 1RM at tempt.
5. Gener ally, it is desirable to measur e the 1RM within three to five attempts after the warm-up;
otherwise, f atigue ma y detr act from the final r esult.
6. A more detailed step-b y-step method for the 1RM protocol is shown in figure 18.8 on page
546.
Note:  Normativ e and descriptiv e data for the 1RM bench press are presented in tables 14.1 through
14.5 near the end of the chapter .
  2  1RM BENCH PULL
776
Equipment
A barbel l, weight plates, and two safety locks; enough total weight to accommodate the
maximum load of the strongest athlete; and a variety of plate sizes to allow for 5-pound (2.3
kg) gr adations in weight
A high flat bench (speci fically, the seal r ow bench  is widely a vailable f or this ex ercise)
Personnel
One spot ter, one r ecorder
Procedure
1. Instruct the athlete in pr oper technique f or the bench pul l (figure 14.3a).
2. The athlete gr asps the bar wi th a closed pr onated grip , wider than shoulder width.
3. Bench height is set so the athlete can use a comfortable grip while the weight is off the ground
in the hang posi tion.
4. The athlete starts the lift from the hang position, and the grip should be consistent from test
to test.
5. The bar is pulled up toward the lower chest or upper abdomen with the elbows pointed up
(figure 14.3b).
6. The head position can remain either down or to the side but must remain in contact with the
bench thr oughout the test.
7. A valid repetition is one in which the bar touches the underside of the bench and the bar is
lower ed in a controlled manner to the hang position with full elbow extension without touching
the gr ound.
8. The feet should remain off the ground throughout the test and in the same position
throughout.
9. A mor e detai led step-b y-step method f or the 1RM pr otocol is shown in figure 18.8  (page 546 ).
Note:  Descriptiv e data for the 1RM bench pull are presented in table 14.4 near the end of the
chapter .
777
FIGURE 14.3  (a) Starting posi tion and  (b) top posi tion of the bench pul l.
  3  1RM BACK SQUAT
Equipment
A barbel l, weight plates, and two safety locks; enough total weight to accommodate the
maximum load of the strongest athlete; and a variety of plate sizes to allow for 5-pound (2.3
kg) gr adations in weight
A sturdy squat rack with adjustable spotting bars to suppo rt the weight of the bar if the athlete
is unable to rise (as an al ternativ e, one spot ter can be used at each end of the bar)
A flat and sol id surf ace to stand on
Personnel
Two spot ters, one r ecorder
Procedure
1. Instruct the athlete in pr oper technique f or the back squat as described in chapter 16 .
2. Warm-up sets are performed as for the 1RM bench press test. Howev er, the loads lifted are
typical ly heavier than in the 1RM bench press test, so the load increments will be greater than
those of the 1RM bench pr ess.
3. Refer to figure 18.8  (page 546 ) for a 1RM testing pr otocol.
778
Note:  Normativ e and descriptiv e data for the 1RM back squat are presented in tables 14.1 through
14.5 near the end of the chapter .
Maximum Muscular Power (High-Speed Strength)
  4  ISOMETRIC MID-THIGH PULL
The isometric mid-thigh pul l (IMTP) is a mul tijoint maximal isometric str ength test.
Equipment
Force plate (or two adjacent force plates) that samples at a minimum of 1,000 Hz, but it can
also be conducted using a str ain gauge or cr ane scale that samples at 100 to 133 Hz (29, 32)
An immovable fixed bar to measur e peak force and time-d ependent variables such as the rate
of force development; this specific testing rack is designed for isometric testing and allows for
stepwise adjustments to the bar height. If a strain gauge  is used, a handle is attached to the
strain gauge wi th a chain.
Weightl ifting str aps
Computer or tablet with special ized softw are that allows for the collection and analysis of
force–time curv e data
Goniometer to r ecord the knee and hip angles
Personnel
One tester/r ecorder
779
FIGURE 14.4  Isometric mid-thigh pul l (IMTP) test posi tion.
Procedure
1. The testing rack needs to be set to a height that allows the athlete to mirror the “second pull”
position used in weightl ifting (i.e., clean or power clean). In this position the immo vable bar is
positioned across the upper portion of the thigh, immediately inferior to the pelvis (58) (figure
14.4).
2. When performing the test, the athlete should have an upright trunk position (62, 63) with the
feet roughly hip-width apart and a slight flex of the knee while grasping the bar with a clean
grip while using weightl ifting straps (58). In this position the knee angle should be
approximately 120 degrees and 145 degrees, and the hip angle should be approximately 125
degrees and 150 degrees (62). Howev er, it is important to note that the exact bar position as
well as knee and hip angles are difficult to recommend because an individual’ s anthropometrics
will exert a lar ge influence on the exact posi tion during the test.
3. Before conduct ing the isometric mid-thigh pull test it is important that between one and three
familiarization sessions are performed in order to enhance the reliability of the test (62). Less
familiarization is needed with trained athletes, especial ly those who train regularly with
weightl ifting derivatives. First, the athlete should comple te a dynamic warm-up that includes
dynamic stretches (e.g., bodyweight squats and lunges) as well as dynamic lifting tasks (e.g.,
low-load and moder ate-load mid-thigh pulls). After this is completed, a series of progressively
intense isometric actions should be performed at perceived intensi ties of 50%, 70%, and 90%
of maximum, with 1 to 2 minutes rest between trials (29, 62). During this time the strength
780
and conditioning professional should monitor the athlete’ s body postur e and make corrections
as needed.
4. After completin g the last submaximal trial, the athlete should complete a minimum of three
maximum-ef fort trials separ ated by 1 to 2 minutes of rest. If the main goal of the test is to
determine the peak force that the athlete can produce, each trial should last between 3 and 5
seconds. If the rate of force development (RFD) is of interest, each trial should last up to 1
second (54). Regardless of which protocol is used, if the peak force between trials varies by
more than 15%, addi tional trials ar e warranted (105).
5. Regardless of the protocol used to collect the force–time  curve, all trials need to be visual ly
screened to determine whether they meet preestabl ished criteria (29). If the strength and
condi tioning professional notes any of the following, the trial should be discar ded and another
trial should be conducted:
A quiet standing period of 1 s wi th >50 N change in f orce
Pre-tension (<50 N) whi le maintaining a rigid torso bef ore initiating f orce appl ication
A countermo vement prior to the onset of f orce appl ication
Peak force at the end of the pul l
6. If the trial is deemed acceptable but the peak force of each trial is not within 15% of the
others, addi tional trials should be conducted.
7. When analyzin g the results of an IMTP test, the most common measur es include the peak
force and the force at specific time points (i.e., 50, 100, 150, 200, and 250 ms) (figure 14.5).
These metrics are often reported in absolute and relative terms (i.e., force per kg body
weight). Time- dependent variables such as the RFD and impulse are often quanti fied (and
reflect the change in force production during a certain time period as represented by Δ). The
peak RFD is typical ly quanti fied with a 20-mi llisecond moving window , while the RFD and
impulse are quanti fied during predetermined time windows  (i.e., 0-50, 0-100, 0-200, and 0-250
ms).
Note:  Normativ e data f or the IMTP ar e presented in table 14 .6 near the end of the chapter .
781
FIGURE 14.5  IMTP f orce–time curv e.
Reprinted by permission from C.J. Brady, A.J. Harrison, and T.M. Comyns, “A Review of the Reliability of Biomechanical Variables Produced During the Isometric Mid-Thigh
Pull and Isometric Squat and the Reporting of Normative Data,” Sports Biomechanics 19, no. 1 (2020): 1-25, reprinted by permission of the publisher (Taylor & Francis Ltd,
http://www.tandfonline.com).
  5  NORDIC HAMSTRING TEST
Equipment
A commer cially available instrumented device for the measur ement of eccentric hamstring
strength or a video r ecording device
A stable flooring surf ace on which the dynamometer should be placed
Personnel
One tester/r ecorder
Procedure
1. Set up the instrumented device on a stable surface. The athlete should kneel on the testing
device and place the ankles under the hooks (within which force cells are housed to quanti fy
force). The athlete should be careful to only contact the hooks with the back of the ankles and
to not push off the board with the toes in order to gain leverage. If not using an instrumented
device but using videogr aphy instead, the camer a (or mobile phone) should be placed in the
sagittal view and fixed using a tripod or similar and positioned so that the full range of motion
is recorded. The knees of the athlete should be a 90-degr ee angle of flexion relative to the
lower leg and the rest of the body (figure 14.6a). Care should be taken to ensure that the
athlete does not flex forward at the hips, because occasional ly athletes will do this in order to
reduce the ec centric loading on the hamstrings.
2. The athlete should then lean forward under control (i.e., controlled acceleration) by extending
the knees, increasing the knee angle, and maintaining a straight line from the knees through
the shoulders ( figure 14.6b).
3. After lowering to the ground in this fashion, the athlete may then use the hands to push back
up to the starting posi tion. T ypical ly, 3 to 6 sets of this test ar e perf ormed.
782
4. If using an instrumented device, record absolute force of eccentric hamstring force, typical ly
measur ed in newtons (N). Ratio or allometric scaling of peak force, as discussed earlier in the
chapter , may also be conside red with Nordic hamstring force outputs to account for variations
in body mass and length on the peak force measur emen ts. Other metrics such as torque in
newton-meters (Nm) or the percentage of asymmetry present between left and right
hamstrings may also be recorded if desired. If using videogr aphy alone, the break point angle
(the angle at which the external knee flexor moment can no longer be resisted and the athlete
loses active control of down ward motion) can be reported as a moder ate proxy of eccentric
hamstring str ength.
Note:  Descriptiv e data for the Nordic hamstring test are presented in table 14.7 near the end of the
chapter .
783
784
FIGURE 14.6  Nor dic hamstring test (wi thout an instrumented device).
  6  1RM POWER CLEAN
Note:  Because the power clean exercise has high technical demands, two athletes with the same
muscular power capaci ty can differ greatly in their tested 1RM, lessening the value of the test for
predicting athletic perf ormance.
Equipment
An Olympic-style barbel l with a revolving sleeve, weight plates, and two safety locks; enough
total weight to accommodat e the maximum load of the strongest athlete; and a variety of
plate siz es to al low for 5-pound (2.3 kg) gr adations in weight
A lifting platf orm or designated ar ea set apart f rom the r est of the f acility for saf ety
Personnel
One tester/r ecorder
Procedure
1. Instruct the athlete in pr oper technique f or the power clean as described in chapter 16 .
2. Warm-up sets are performed and load increments are selected as for the 1RM bench press
test.
3. Refer to figure 18.8  (page 546 ) for a 1RM testing pr otocol.
Note:  Normativ e and descriptiv e data for the 1RM power clean are presented in tables 14.1 through
14.4 near the end of the chapter .
  7  STANDING LONG (BROAD) JUMP
Equipment
A flat jumping area at least 20 feet (6 m) in length, which can be a gym floor, artificial turf,
grass field, or a tr ack
A tape measur e at least 10 f eet (3 m) long
Duct tape or masking tape
Permissible al ternativ e: a commer cial jumping mat pr emark ed in hal f-inch (1 cm) incr ements
Personnel
One distance judge, one r ecorder
Procedure
1. Place a 2- to 3-f oot (0.6-0.9 m) length of tape on the floor to serv e as a starting l ine.
2. The athlete stands wi th the toes just behind the starting l ine.
3. The athlete perf orms a countermo vement and jumps f orward as f ar as possible.
4. The athlete must land on the f eet for the jump to be scor ed. Otherwise, the trial is r epeated.
5. A marker is placed at the back edge of the athlete’ s rearmost heel, and the tape measur e
determines the distance between the starting l ine and the mark.
6. The best of thr ee trials is r ecorded to the near est 0.5 inch or 1 centimeter .
Note:  Normativ e and descriptiv e data for the standing long jump are presented in tables 14.8 to
14.10 near the end of the chapter .
  8  VERTICAL JUMP
785