# Section 14.2

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 14: Administration, Scoring, and Interpretation of Selected Tests

**Section:** 14.2 -- Monitoring Protocols

**PDF Pages:** 786--810

Equipment
A force plate set up on a stable surf ace
A suitable computer , tablet, or cell phone connected to force plate hardware and with the
corresponding softw are instal led
Permissible alternativ es: a smooth wall with a ceiling higher than the highest jumper ’s jump
height plus chalk of a different color than the wall or a commer cial device for vertical jump
testing (e.g. , Vertec)
Personnel
One tester/r ecorder
Procedure (Using a Force Plate)
1. Before testing,  the tester should calibrate and set up the force plate as per the manuf acturer’s
instructions.
2. The force plate should always be set up on a stable surface (ideal ly in the same location each
time) and the force zeroed with nothing on the plates immediately before the athlete tests.
Without a preparatory or stutter step, the athlete performs a countermo vement by quickly
flexing the knees and hips, moving the trunk forward and down ward, and swinging the arms
backw ard.
3. The countermo vement jump is most commonly conducted  with hands in a fixed position on the
hips throughout the takeoff portion of the jump to isolate the power and coordination capaci ty
of the lower limbs. Jumping with the use of an arm swing  can also be tested and is referred to
as an Abalak ov jump. Either way, consistency should be used and each jump should be tracked
as to whether i t was perf ormed wi th (Abalak ov) or wi thout an arm swing.
4. Figure 14.7 shows an example of how the vertical ground reaction forces change across the
five phases of a vertical jump with a countermo vement  when measur ed with a force plate
testing system.
Procedure (Using a Wall and Chalk)
1. The tester rubs chalk on the fingertips of the athlete’ s dominant hand.
2. The athlete stands with the dominant shoulder about 6 inches (15 cm) from the wall and, with
both feet flat on the floor, reaches as high as possible with the dominant hand and makes a
chalk mark on the w all.
3. The athlete then lowers the dominant hand and, without a preparatory or stutter step,
performs a countermo vemen t by quickly flexing the knees  and hips, moving the trunk forward
and down ward, and swinging the arms backw ard. During the jump, the dominant arm reaches
upward whi le the nondominant arm mo ves down ward relative to the body .
4. At the highest point in the jump, the athlete places a second chalk mark on the wall with the
fingers of the dominant hand, using a swiping motion of the fingers. The score is the vertical
distance between the two chalk marks.
5. The best of thr ee trials is r ecorded to the near est 0.5 inch or 1.0 centimeter .
Procedure (Using a Commercial Vertec Device)
1. The tester adjusts the height of the stack of movable color-coded horizontal plastic vanes to be
within the athlete’ s standing reach height. The highest vane that can be reached and pushed
forward with the dominant hand while the athlete stands flat-footed determines the standing
touch height.
2. The vane stack is then raised by a measur ed distance (mark ed on the shaft holding the vanes)
so that the athlete will not jump higher or lower than the set of vanes. This requires a rough
786
estimate of how high the particular athlete will jump, but a correction can be made on the
second at tempt i f necessary .
3. Without a preparatory or stutter step, the athlete performs a countermo vement by quickly
flexing the knees and hips, moving the trunk forward and down ward, and swinging the arms
backw ard (figure 14.8a). During the jump, the dominant arm reaches upward while the
nondominant arm mo ves down ward relative to the body .
4. At the highest point in the jump, the athlete taps the highest possible vane with the fingers of
the dominant hand (figure 14.8b). The score is the vertical distance between the height of the
highest vane tapped during the standing vertical  reach and the vane tapped at the highest
point of the jump .
5. The best of three trials is recorded to the nearest 0.5 inches or 1 centimeter (the distance
between adjacent v anes).
FIGURE 14.7 Example force–time curve of a countermo vement jump when measur ed with a force plate testing system. Vertical
dotted lines divide the typical phases (UP, unloading phase; BP, breaking phase; PP, propulsiv e phase; FP, flight phase; LP, landing
phase).
Reprinted by permission from Z. Anicic, D. Janicijevic, O.M. Knezevic, et al., “Assessment of Countermovement Jump: What Should We Report?,” Life 13, no. 1 (2023): 190.
https://doi.org/10.3390/life13010190. Distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by
/4.0/).
The strength and condi tioning  professional should be aware of potential sources of error with the
jump- and-r each-st yle tests. These include a disconnect between the moment when the athlete
reaches the wall or vanes with the hand and the moment the maximum height of the body’s center
of mass is achieved; additional ly, shoulder mobility issues may limit some athlete’ s reach height.
Also, jump height values calculated using common techn ologies such as force plates and contact
mats are most often measur ed as the maximum total body center of mass height relative to its
height at takeoff and not relative to its height when standing still (158). Thus, jump height values
from jump-and-r each tests should not be compar ed directly to, or used interchangeably with, jump
height values recorded with such technologies or, indeed, with different jump techniques, such as
when k eeping arms akimbo .
Note:  Descriptiv e data for the vertical jump are presented in table 14.5 and table 14.10 near the
end of the chapter .
787
FIGURE 14.8  (a) Starting posi tion and  (b) maximum height of the v ertical jump using the V ertec.
  9  SQUAT JUMP (STATIC VERTICAL JUMP)
The equipment needed and the personnel required for the squat (static) vertical jump are the same
as the v ertical jump wi th a countermo vement.
Procedure
1. The test procedur es are essential ly the same as for the vertical jump, except that the
countermo vement is removed. Begin with the athlete standing on a calibrated, zeroed force
platform. (Note:  The squat jump and vertical jump with countermo vement can also be tested
using a switch or contact mat system (figure 14.9) [158], which estimates jump height [51]
but cannot measur e force outputs. )
2. The athlete descends into a squat position (knee angle approximately 110 degrees) and holds
this posi tion for 2 to 3 seconds bef ore jumping v ertical ly, keeping hands fix ed on hips.
3. The takeoff and landing positions, as well as jumping strategy , should be the same for each
trial. Specifically, the tester should ensur e there is no countermo vement (dip) at the start of
the jump, both through visual observ ation and, where a force plate is used, by assessing the
force–time curv e.
4. The best of three trials is recorded. The ratio of the vertical jump height with
countermo vement to squat jump height can be calculated as the ec centric uti lization r atio (99).
5. Figure 14.10 shows an example of how the vertical ground reaction forces change across the
three phases of a static v ertical jump when measur ed wi th a f orce plate testing system.
Note:  Descriptiv e data for the static vertical jump are presented in table 14.10 near the end of the
chapter .
788
FIGURE 14.9   (a) Starting posi tion and  (b) maximum height of the static v ertical jump when measur ed wi th a swi tch mat.
FIGURE 14.10  Example force–tim e curve of a static vertical (squat) jump when measur ed with a force plate testing system.
Vertical dot ted lines divide the t ypical phases (BP , breaking phase; PP , propulsiv e phase; FP , flight phase; LP , landing phase).
Adapted from Z. Anicic, D. Janicijevic, O.M. Knezevic, et al., “Assessment of Countermovement Jump: What Should We Report?,” Life 13, no. 1 (2023): 190. https://doi.org
/10.3390/life13010190. Distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
789
  10  DROP JUMP
Equipment
A box that ma y vary in height f rom 8 to 16 inches (20-40 cm)
Floor wi th good tr action
Measur ement equipment such as force plates (with corresponding softw are on laptop or
tablet), swi tch mats, optoelectr onic systems, and smartphone appl ications
Personnel
One tester/r ecorder
Procedure
1. When performing a drop vertical jump, the athlete should step out before free-falling from as
close as possible to the height of the box rather than stepping down (i.e., lowering) or jumping
off (i.e., rising) the box. Box height selection for an athlete can vary but is typical ly 20
centimeters (8 in.), 30 centimeters (12 in.), or 40 centim eters (16 in.) (figure 14.11a). The
higher the box, the greater the plyometric demand. When using a device that is not flush with
the ground or base of the box when conducting the drop vertical jump test, such as when
using a switch mat, the strength and condi tioning professional should measur e the box height
from the top of the bo x to the top surf ace of the swi tch mat.
2. The athlete steps out from the box and lands on the floor, force plate, or switch mat (figure
14.11b) and, as quickly as possib le, jumps again (figure 14.11c). Drop jumps should be
performed with the athlete attempting to jump with a short ground contact time while still
aiming to jump as high as possible. A short ground contact time is achiev ed by limiting flexion
of the ankles, knees, and hips while in contact with the ground by adopting high leg stiffness
(high f orce with shal low range of motion). It is advised that at least 2 to 3 sets ar e perf ormed.
3. The most reported performan ce variables following drop vertical jump testing are jump height
(from flight time), ground contact time, and reactive strength index  (calculated as jump
height divided by ground contact time) (91). The reactiv e strength index is often consider ed an
indication of how well an athlete can recruit the fast component of the stretch-shortening
cycle.
4. Figure 14.12 shows an example of the force–time curve with labels pointing out the peak
vertical ground reaction force, contact time, and flight time when measur ed with a force plate
testing system.
790
FIGURE 14.11  (a) Starting position on box, (b) contact on switch mat, (c) maximum height of the drop jump to measur e reactiv e
strength index.
FIGURE 14.12  Example f orce–time curv e of a dr op jump .
Reprinted by permission from R. Healy and A.J. Harrison, “The Effects of a Unilateral Gluteal Activation Protocol on Single Leg Drop Jump Performance,” Sports
Biomechanics 13, no. 1 (2014): 33-46, reprinted by permission of the publisher (Taylor & Francis Ltd, http://www.tandfonline.com).
791
  11  REBOUND JUMP
Equipment
Floor wi th good tr action
Measur ement equipment such as force plates (with corresponding softw are on a laptop or
tablet), jump mats, optoelectr onic systems, and smartphone appl ications
Personnel
One tester/r ecorder
Procedure
1. Rebound-based vertical jumps require the athlete to jump from a preceding vertical jump.
When performing a rebound vertical jump, the athlete should first complete a maximal-ef fort
vertical countermo vement jump followed by either a predetermined number of rebound
vertical jump repetitions or a predetermined set duration (e.g., 10 seconds). Rebound vertical
jumps from a ground-start position have been performed with single or multiple repetitions,
including the 10-5 repeated jump test (64), which requires 10 maximal vertical rebound jumps
following the ini tial maximum countermo vement jump .
2. All styles of rebound vertical jump should be performed with the athlete attempting to jump
with a short ground contact time while still aiming to jump as high as possible. A short ground
contact time is achiev ed by limiting flexion of the ankles, knees, and hips while in contact with
the gr ound b y adopting high leg sti ffness (high f orce with shal low range of motion).
3. As per the drop jump, the most reported performance variables following rebound vertical
jump testing are jump height , ground contact time, and reactiv e strength index (calculated as
jump height divided by ground contact time). For the 10-5 repeated jump test, the best 5
repetitions in terms of r eactiv e strength index ar e used and a veraged f or the test outcome.
Note:  Descriptiv e data for the rebound jump are presented in table 14.11 near the end of the
chapter .
  12  MARGARIA-KALAMEN TEST
Equipment
Staircase with nine or more steps, each approximately 7 inches (18 cm) high, and a straight
and flat lead-up ar ea 20 f eet (6 m) or mor e in length ( figure 14.13)
Measuring tape or stick
An electr onic timing system wi th both a start and a stop swi tch mechanism
Scale
Personnel
One tester/r ecorder
Procedure
1. The height of each step is measur ed with a ruler or tape measur e, and the elevation from the
third step to the ninth step is calculated (6 × step height).
2. The timer start switch mecha nism is placed on the third step, and the stop switch mechanism
is placed on the ninth step .
3. The athlete to be tested is weighed on a scale, warms up, and practices running up the stairs
three steps at a time.
4. When ready, the athlete sprints toward the stairs from a standing start 20 feet (6 m) from the
base of the stairs and then up the staircase three steps at a time (third step to sixth step to
792
ninth step) as f ast as possible.
5. The time from third- to ninth-step contact is determined to the nearest 0.01 second using the
timing system.
6. Power in watts is calculated as the athlete’ s weight  (w) in newtons (lb × 4.45 or kg × 9.807)
times height  (h) in meters (inches × 0.0254) from the third step to the ninth step divided by
the measur ed time interv al (t) in seconds;  P (watts) = (w × h) / t.
7. Repeat the test two mor e times wi th a 2- to 3-minute r ecovery period between each trial.
Note:  Normativ e data for the Margaria-K alamen test are presented in table 14.12 near the end of
the chapter .
FIGURE 14.13  Mar garia-K alamen stair sprint test.
Reprinted by permission from E. Fox, R. Bowers, and M. Foss, The Physiological Basis for Exercise and Sport, 5th ed. (Brown & Benchmark, 1993), 675, permission
conveyed through Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.
  13  VELOCITY-BASED TESTING (VBT)
Equipment
A commer cial VB T device and the equipment r equired to perf orm the ex ercise in question (e.g. ,
an inertial measur ement unit [IMU], a linear position transducer , a depth-sensing camer a
system, and a computer -vision enabled smartphone appl ication)
An Olympic -style barbel l with weight plates and locking collars; the weight should be
appropriate for the individual athlete being tested (in this case, a 1RM back squat will be the
exercise ev aluated)
Personnel
One tester/r ecorder
Procedure
1. Place the VBT device in a suitable position based on the type of data collection. For example, a
linear position transducer will be placed under the barbel l and tether ed to the barbel l, whereas
an IMU sensor wi ll be af fixed dir ectly to the barbel l.
2. The exercise selected (e.g., bench press, squat, deadl ift) will depend on the needs of the
athlete, individual sport, and training session being performed. In the case of a back squat,
793
follow the technique described in chapter 16 .
3. From the measuring device, obtain the velocity of the barbell typical ly in meters per second,
power measur ed in watts, and peak forces measur ed in newtons. Metrics may vary depending
on the device used for testing or the individual purposes of the tester and athlete. As outlined
earlier in the chapter , VBT data can be used to cr eate a load– velocity profile.
Note:  Descriptiv e data f or VB T are presented in table 14 .13 near the end of the chapter .
Anaerobic Capacity
  14  300-YARD (274 M) SHUTTLE RUN
Equipment
A stopw atch wi th at least 0.1-second r esolution
Two par allel lines 25 y ards (23 m) apart on a flat surf ace (figure 14.14)
Personnel
One timer , two l ine judges
Procedure
1. Pair off athletes of simi lar abi lity.
2. Position two athletes immediately behind one l ine, facing the other l ine.
3. On an auditory signal, the athletes sprint to the line 25 yards (23 m) away, making foot
contact with it, then immediately sprint back to the first line. Six such round trips are made as
fast as possible wi thout stopping (6 × 50 y d = 300 y d [274 m]).
4. On completion of the first trial, record both athletes’ times to the nearest 0.1 second and start
a clock to time a 5-minute rest interv al. As each pair of athletes completes the first trial, they
may walk and str etch but must sta y alert f or the starting time on the second trial.
5. After the r est period, the pair of athletes does another trial.
6. The a verage of two trials is r ecorded to the near est 0.1 second.
Note:  Descriptiv e data for the 300-yard (274 m) shuttle are presented in table 14.14 near the end
of the chapter .
794
FIGURE 14.14  Ground la yout for the 300- yard (274 m) shut tle.
Adapted by permission from G.M. Gillam and M. Marks, “300 Yard Shuttle Run,” National Strength and Conditioning Association Journal 5, no. 5 (1983): 46.
  15  90-SECOND BOX JUMP TEST
Equipment
Stopw atch
A box with the dimensions of 18 inches (46 cm) in height and 30 inches (76 cm) in width
A nonsl ip surf ace on which to perf orm the test in which the athlete can saf ely land and jump
Personnel
One r ecorder/tester
Procedure
1. The purpose of this test is to observ e how many times the athlete can jump over the box in a
left to right fashion over a duration of 90 seconds. The athlete begins on top of the box and
then jumps down laterally to one side before jumping back up to the top of the box again. The
athlete then repeats this procedur e in the opposi te direction. Each time the athlete reaches the
top of the bo x counts as 1 r epetition.
2. The athlete must leave the ground with two feet and touch the top of the box with two feet
before jumping down to the other side. The athlete is not permi tted to step up onto the bo x.
3. This is repeated for as many times as the athlete is able to during the 90-second duration of
the test. The tester should record the number of hops taken with proper form over the course
of the test.
Note:  Descriptiv e data for the 90-second box jump test are presented in table 14.15 near the end
of the chapter .
Local Muscular Endurance
  16  PARTIAL CURL-UP
The partial curl-up test measur es the muscular endur ance of the abdominal muscles. It is favored
over the si t-up test because i t eliminates the use of the hip flex or muscles.
795
Equipment
Metronome
Ruler
Masking tape
Mat
Personnel
One r ecorder/technique judge
Procedure
1. The athlete assumes a supine position on a mat with a 90-degr ee knee angle (figure 14.15a).
The arms are at the sides, resting on the floor, with the fingers touching a 4-inch-long (10 cm)
piece of maskin g tape positioned perpendicular to the fingers. A second piece of masking tape
is situated parallel to the first tape at a distance determined by the age of the athlete (4.7
inches [12 cm] f or those y ounger than 45 and 3.1 inches [8 cm] f or those 45 or older).
2. Set a metronome to 40 beats/min and have the athlete do slow, controlled curl-ups to lift the
shoulder blades off the mat (trunk makes a 30-degr ee angle with the mat; figure 14.15b) in
time with the metronome (20 curl-ups per minute). The upper back must touch the floor
before each curl-up . The athlete should avoid flexing the neck to bring the chin close to the
chest.
3. The athlete perf orms as man y curl-ups as possible wi thout pausing, to a maximum of 75.
Note:  Normativ e data for the partial curl-up are presented in table 14.16 near the end of the
chapter .
FIGURE 14.15  (a) Beginning posi tion and  (b) end posi tion of the partial curl-up test.
  17  PUSH-UP
Equipment
A 4-inch (10 cm)-diameter f oam r oller (for the modi fied push-up)
Personnel
796
One r ecorder/technique judge
Procedures
1. Assume the standar d push-up starting position with the hands shoulder -width apart and
elbows and body straight (figure 14.16a). The bottom position for the standar d push-up is
when the chest makes conta ct with the recorder’s fist held vertical ly against the ground (not
shown in  figure 14.16b).
2. A modified version establ ishes a starting position with the knees rather than the feet
contacting the ground; the knees should be flexed to 90 degrees with the ankles crossed
(figure 14.17a). There is no standar d criterion for the bottom position of the modified push-up
(44), but it has been suggested that the torso should come in contact with a foam roller rather
than a fist ( figure 14.17b).
3. For either v ersion, r epetitions that do not achiev e the bot tom posi tion ar e not counted.
Note:  Normativ e data f or the push-up ar e presented in table 14 .17 near the end of the chapter .
FIGURE 14.16  (a) Beginning posi tion and  (b) down posi tion of the standar d push-up .
FIGURE 14.17  (a) Beginning posi tion and  (b) down posi tion of the modi fied push-up .
18  ARMY FITNESS TEST (AFT) HAND-RELEASE PUSH-UP
(HRP)
Equipment
Level nonsl ip ground or flooring surf ace
Personnel
One r ecorder/technique judge
Procedure
797
1. The starting position of this test will begin with the athlete lying prone on the ground with the
chest, hips, and legs touching the ground (figure 14.18a). Hands are flat on the ground (rather
than what is shown in the photo) with the index fingers inside of the shoulders. The feet
should be no mor e than one boot -width part, and the toes should be touching the gr ound.
2. The tester will begin the test on the command of “Go,” and the athlete must perform as many
push-ups as physical ly able in a 2-minute time period. The athlete should keep a straight line
from the ankles to the head (figure 14.18b). It is not permissible to flex the knees or hips or to
lift the feet off of the ground at any point during the test. After the athlete has fully extended
the arms, he or she should lower the body back to the ground, allowing the chest, hips, and
legs to contact the ground simultaneously . The tester should not count any repetitions in which
a straight al ignment of the body f rom head to f eet is not maintained.
3. At the point at which the athlete’ s body comes back into contact with the ground, two variants
of this test are acceptable: the hand lift and the arm extension. If the hand lift variant is to be
performed, the athlete should  lift both hands so as to create visible space between the palms
and the ground (figure 14.18c). The athlete should then return the hands to the starting
position and begin another repetition. With the arm extension variant, once the athlete’ s body
has returned to the ground, the athlete will then extend the arms fully to form a 90-degr ee
angle between  the arms and the torso (figure 14.18d). The athlete should then return to the
starting posi tion and begin another r epetition.
4. The athlete is not allowed to rest at any time during the test with the exception of the front
rest position, which consists of the top position of the push-up with the arms fully extended
and the body straight. If the tester observ es that the athlete has remained motionless for more
than 5 seconds, the test should be discontinued and the repetitions performed to this point
counted as the athlete’ s score for the test. The test will also be discontinued if the athlete lifts
a foot off of the ground or touches a knee to the ground. Any breakdown in technique such as
flexing the hips or knees should not be counted in the r epetition total.
Note:  AFT normativ e data for the hand-r elease push-up are presented in table 14.18 near the end
of the chapter .
FIGURE 14.18  (a) Beginning position (but with the hands on the ground instead),  (b) up position, (c) hand lift variant, and (d)
arm extension v ariant of the hand-r elease push-up .
798
  19  YMCA BENCH PRESS TEST
Equipment
A barbe ll, weight plates, two safety locks, and enough total weight to assemble an 80-pound
(36 kg) or a 35-pound (16 kg) load (including saf ety locks)
Flat bench pr ess bench (pr eferably wi th an upright r ack to hold the barbel l)
Metronome
Personnel
One spot ter/recorder
Procedure
1. Instruct the athlete in proper technique for the flat barbel l bench press as described in chapter
16.
2. Allow the athlete to perform a specific warm-up of 5 to 10 repetitions with a light to moder ate
load.
3. The spotter/recorder stands at the head end of the bench throughout the test to help raise the
bar on a f ailed at tempt and to help the athlete place the bar back on the r ack.
4. Set the r esistance at 80 pounds (36 kg) f or males and 35 pounds (16 kg) f or females.
5. Set the metronome cadence at 60 beats/min to establ ish a rate of 30 repetitions per minute
(one beat up , one beat down).
6. The athlete grips the bar at shoulder -width, lifts the bar off the rack, and extends the elbows.
Then, in time with the metronome, the athlete repeatedly lowers the bar to the chest and
raises it up again to full elbow extension, until the athlete can no longer keep up with the
metronome. The movement should be smooth and controlled, with the bar reaching its highest
and lowest posi tion wi th each beat of the metr onome.
Note:  Normativ e data for the YMCA  bench press test are presented in table 14.19 near the end of
the chapter .
Aerobic Capacity
  20  1.5-MILE (2.4 KM) RUN
Equipment
Stopw atch
Quarter -mile running track or measur ed and marked 1.5-mi le (2.4 km) flat course with a good
running surf ace
Personnel
One tester to cal l off each athlete’ s time, one r ecorder
Procedure
1. Have each athlete w arm up and str etch bef ore the test.
2. Each athlete should be recognizable to the scorer at the finish line. If that is not possible,
numbers should be pinned to the athletes’ shirts.
3. At the start, al l athletes l ine up behind the starting l ine.
4. Instruct the athletes to complete the run as quickly as possible at a steady pace that they can
barely maintain over the distance. (Note:  Some athletes may have limited experience at pacing
799
long efforts such as this, so some familiarization and prior pacing efforts in training are
suggested. )
5. On an audi tory signal, the athletes start running and co ver the course as quickly as possible.
6. As the athletes cross the finish line, each person’ s time is recorded on a form as a timer calls
off the time in minutes and seconds (00:00).
Note:  Normativ e data for the 1.5-mi le (2.4 km) run are presented in tables 14.22 through 14.25
near the end of the chapter . For each 1.5-mi le (2.4 km) run time, the tables show an estimated
maximal rate of oxygen consumption; the norms for athletes in various sports are shown in table
14.26 near the end of the chapter .
  21  12-MINUTE RUN
Equipment
A 400-meter (437- yard) track or flat looped course wi th a mark er at each 100 meters
Stopw atch
Personnel
One tester to cal l out each athlete’ s posi tion, one r ecorder
Procedure
1. Athletes l ine up at the starting l ine.
2. On an auditory signal, the athletes travel by foot as far as possible in 12 minutes, preferably by
running but, i f necessary , by walking part or al l of the time.
3. At 12 minutes, on an audi tory signal, al l the athletes stop in place.
4. The distance run by each athlete (laps × 400 m—e.g. , 5.25 laps × 400 m = 2,100 m) is
calculated and r ecorded.
Note:  Normativ e data for the 12-minute run are presented in table 14.27 near the end of the
chapter .
22  YO-YO INTERMITTENT RECOVERY TEST
The use of the Yo-Yo intermi ttent recovery tests (IRT1 and IRT2) is now commonplace in field
testing protocols for team sports such as soccer and lacrosse (10, 18, 85). It is suggested that
these tests are more specific to team sports because they mimic the demands of short, intense
bursts of exercise followed by short recovery periods. Both tests consist of 2 × 20-meter (22 yd)
shuttle runs at increasing speeds interspersed with a 10-second period of recovery, with the IRT1
starting at 10 km/h (6.2 mph) and the IRT2 starting at 13 km/h (8.1 mph). It is recommended that
strength and condi tioning pr ofessionals use the IR T1.
Equipment
Cones
A tape measur e at least 30 meters (33 y d) long
Audio softw are specifically for the Yo-Yo intermi ttent recovery test, IRT1 (available from a
variety of commer cial sour ces)
Method of br oadcasting the audio fi les (e.g. , wireless speak ers)
Recording sheet
Flat floor wi th good tr action
Personnel
One tester/r ecorder, one spot ter
800
Procedure
1. Measur e out a 20-meter (22 yd) test course and arrange cones as seen in figure 14.19. Place
markers 2 meters (7 ft) apart at both ends of the test course at the start and turning lines.
Also measur e out a 5-meter (16 ft) distance behind the start l ine.
2. Have the athletes warm up and stretch before the test. The athletes should run the course
with a submaximal ef fort for practice.
3. The test begins wi th the athletes standing at the start l ine.
4. On an auditory signal, the athletes run forward to the turning line. At the sound of the second
signal, athletes arrive at the turning line and then run back to the starting line, arriving in time
with the next sound.
5. When the start marker is passed, the athletes jog toward the 5-meter (16 ft) mark, then turn
back to the start l ine. A t this point the athletes stop and w ait for the next sound.
6. The athletes are required to place one foot on or over the starting or turning line at the sound
of each beep .
7. The athletes continue running for as long as they can maintain the increasing speed as
indicated b y the audi tory signals.
8. The termination of the test is indicated by the inability of an athlete to maintain the required
pace f or two trials. A w arning is giv en the first time the start or turning l ine is not r eached.
9. At the end of the test, record the last level and numbe r of 2 × 20-meter (22 yd) interv als
performed at that lev el on a r ecording sheet.
10. The final Yo-Yo intermi ttent recovery speed and interv al score can be used to calculate the
total distance co vered by the athlete during the test.
Note:  Descriptiv e data for the Yo-Yo intermi ttent recovery test are presented in table 14.28 near the
end of the chapter .
801
FIGURE 14.19  Setup f or the Y o-Yo intermi ttent r ecovery test.
  23  MAXIMAL AEROBIC SPEED TEST
Equipment
Cones
A tape measur e at least 30 meters (33 y d) long
Audio softw are speci fically for the test
Method of br oadcasting the audio fi les (e.g. , wireless speak ers)
Recording sheet
Indoor or outdoor running tr ack (at least 200 m [219 y d])
Personnel
One tester/r ecorder
Procedure
1. Marker cones ar e placed at 25-meter (27 y d) interv als ar ound the running tr ack.
2. The initial speed of the test is set between 8 and 12 km/h (5-7 mph) depending on the fitness
level of the athlete. It is gener ally recommended that athletes start at 10 km/h (6 mph).
3. The speed is then increased by 1 km/h (0.6 mph) every 2 minutes until the athlete cannot
maintain the speed.
802
4. The last speed maintained for at least 2 minutes is consider ed the speed associated with
V̇O2max or MA S.
5. The test is terminated if the athlete fails to reach the next cone on two consecutiv e occasions
in the r equired time.
6. The speed at the last comple ted stage is increased by 0.5 km/h if the athlete is able to run a
half stage.
7. The V̇O2max of the athlete can be calculated by multiplying 3.5 × MAS (speed in km/h) (87,
88).
8. If the tester does not have access to the audio version, it is possible to conduct the test using
a whistle. Calculate the timing of whistles using a set speed for reaching the next cone. For
example, when  the distance between cones is 25 meters, the timing of whistles for 10 km/h
would be ev ery 9 seconds.
Note:  Norms for the V̇O2max of athlete s in various sports are shown in table 14.26 near the end of
the chapter .
  24  30-15 INTERMITTENT FITNESS TEST (IFT)
Equipment
A 40-meter (44 y d) long surf ace that is stable and sui table f or an athlete to run on
Measuring tape
Marking cones
30-15 IFT audio recording and a player suitable for the media type being used that can be
heard across the testing en vironment
Personnel
One r ecorder/tester
Procedure
1. Measur e out and arr ange the cones as shown in figure 14.20 (at lines A, B , and C).
2. Have the athletes warm up before the test by running the course with a submaximal effort for
practice.
3. The test begins wi th the athletes standing at the start l ine (line A).
4. The first interv al begins at a jogging speed of 8.0 km/h (5 mph). The speed is then increased
by 0.5 km/h (0.3 mph) in each subsequent stage.
5. Athletes run using the beeps played from the audio file to maintain their pace. They run
between lines A and C, and they should pass through each 3-meter (10 ft) zone associated
with lines A, B , and C wi th the sound of each beep .
6. A different type of beep indicates when to stop running. At that point the athletes have 15
seconds as a recovery to walk to the next line, where they will wait for the start of the next
interv al.
7. Athletes adv ance stages unti l they cannot r each the r elevant line on thr ee consecutiv e beeps.
8. Record the running speed (km/h) achiev ed during the last completed stage (VIFT). The total
running distance of each interv al is corr ected b y a factor of 0. 7 second per change of dir ection.
Note:  Descriptiv e data for the 30-15 IFT are presented in figure 14.34 (a, females;  b, males) near
the end of the chapter .
803
FIGURE 14.20  30-15 IF T course la yout.
Reprinted by permission from M. Buccheit, “The 30-15 Intermittent Fitness Test: Accuracy for Individualizing Interval Training of Young Intermittent Sport Players,” Journal
of Strength and Conditioning Research 22, no. 2 (2008): 365-374.
Change of Direction or Agility
  25  T-TEST
Equipment
Four cones
A tape measur e at least 5 y ards (4.6 m) long
Stopw atch or timing gates, if available, with correspond ing softw are on a laptop , tablet, or
smartphone appl ication
Flat floor wi th good tr action
Personnel
One tester/r ecorder, one spot ter
Procedure
1. Arrange four cones as shown in figure 14.21 (points A, B, C, and D). Set the timing gates up at
the start and finish l ine.
2. Have the athlete warm up and stretch before the test. The athlete may run the course with a
submaximal ef fort for practice.
3. The test begins wi th the athlete standing at point A.
4. On an auditory signal, the athlete sprints forward to point B and touches the base of the cone
with the right hand.
5. Then, while facing forward and not crossing the feet, the athlete shuffles to the left 5 yards
(4.6 m) and touches the base of the cone at point C wi th the left hand.
6. The athlete then shuffles to the right 10 yards (9 m) and touches the base of the cone at point
D with the right hand.
7. The athlete then shuffles to the left 5 yards (4.6 m) and touches the base of the cone at point
B with the left hand, and next runs backw ard past point A, at which time the w atch is stopped.
8. For safety, a spotter and gym mat should be positioned several feet behind point A to catch an
athlete who f alls whi le running backw ard.
9. The best time of two trials is r ecorded to the near est 0.1 second.
804
10. The following are reasons for disqual ification of a trial: The athlete fails to touch the base of
any cone, crosses one foot in front of the other instead of shuffling the feet, or fails to face
forward for the entir e test.
Note:  Descriptiv e data f or the T -test ar e presented in table 14 .29 near the end of the chapter .
FIGURE 14.21  Floor la yout for the T -test.
Adapted by permission from D. Semenick, “Tests and Measurements: The T-Test,” National Strength and Conditioning Association Journal 12, no. 1 (1990): 36-37.
  26  HEXAGON TEST
Equipment
Adhesiv e tape of a color that contr asts wi th the floor
Measuring tape or stick
Stopw atch
Flat floor wi th good tr action
Personnel
One timer/r ecorder, one l ine judge
Procedure
1. Using the adhesiv e tape, create a hexagon on the floor with 24-inch (61 cm) sides meeting to
form 120-degr ee angles ( figure 14.22).
2. The athlete w arms up and pr actices perf ormance of the test at submaximal speed.
3. The test begins wi th the athlete standing in the middle of the hexagon.
4. On an auditory signal, the athlete begins double-leg hopping from the center of the hexagon
over each side and back to the center , starting with the side directly in front of the athlete, in a
continuous clockwise sequen ce until all six sides are covered three times (three revolutions
around the hexagon for a total of 18 jumps) and the athlete is again standing at the center .
The athlete r emains f acing the same dir ection thr oughout the test.
5. If the athlete lands on a side of the hexagon rather than over it, or loses balance and takes an
extra step or changes the direction in which he or she is facing, the trial is stopped and
restarted after the athlete is al lowed time f or full recovery.
805
6. The best time of thr ee trials is r ecorded to the near est 0.1 second.
Note:  Descriptiv e data for the hexagon test are presented in table 14.29 near the end of the
chapter .
FIGURE 14.22  Layout for the hexagon test.
Adapted by permission from K. Pauole, K. Madole, J. Garhammer, et al., “Reliability and Validity of the T-Test as a Measure of Agility, Leg Power, and Leg Speed in College-
Aged Men and Women,” Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research 14, no. 4 (2000): 443-450.
  27  5-10-5 TEST
This test is also cal led the  pro agility test  or the  20-yard shut tle.
Equipment
An American footbal l field or other field marked with three parallel lines 5 yards (4.6 m) apart
(figure 14.23)
Stopw atch or timing gates, if available, with correspond ing softw are on a laptop , tablet, or
smartphone appl ication
Personnel
One timer/r ecorder, one l ine judge
Procedure
1. If using one timing gate for total end time, set this up at the start and finish line. If multiple
gates are available, set up at the start and finish line as well as at each turn line to measur e
each spl it.
2. The athlete str addles the center l ine using a thr ee-point stance.
3. On an auditory signal, the athlete sprints 5 yards (4.6 m) to the line on the left, then changes
direction and sprints 10 yards (9 m) to the line on the right, then again changes direction and
sprints 5 yards (4.6 m) to the center line. Hand (or foot) contact must be made with all
indicated l ines. ( Note:  It is important that this is k ept consistent f or both trials. )
4. The best time of two trials is r ecorded to the near est 0.01 second.
Note:  Normativ e data for the 5-10-5 test (previously pro agility) are presented in tables 14.29 and
14.30 near the end of the chapter .
806
FIGURE 14.23  Layout for the 5-10-5 test.
  28  5-0-5 TEST
Equipment
Seven cones
Stopw atch or timing gates, if available, with correspond ing softw are on a laptop , tablet, or
smartphone appl ication
Personnel
One timer/r ecorder, one l ine judge
Procedure
1. Arrange the cones as seen in figure 14.24. If timing lights are available, these can also be set
up as shown.
2. Have the athlete warm up and stretch before the test. The athlete may run the course with a
submaximal ef fort for practice.
3. The test begins wi th the athlete standing at the start l ine.
4. On an auditory signal, the athlete sprints forward 10 meters (11 yd) to the first set of timing
lights, then sprints a further 5 meters (5 yd) to the turnin g line (one foot must be on or over
the line), wher e he or she is r equired to turn and ac celerate of f the l ine.
5. The athlete ma y slow down only after passing thr ough the timing l ights f or the second time.
6. The best time of two trials is r ecorded to the near est 0.1 second.
7. The athlete completes the trials turning off the preferred leg. Alternativ ely, trials (at least two)
can be administer ed turning of f either the pr eferred or non-pr eferred leg.
Note:  Descriptiv e data for the 5-0-5 test is presented in tables 14.29 and 14.30 near the end of the
chapter .
807
FIGURE 14.24  Layout for the 5-0-5 test.
29  ILLINOIS TEST
Equipment
Stopw atch or timing l ights
Tape measur e
Eight cones
Personnel
One tester/r ecorder
Procedure
1. Set up the cones on a course  of 10 meters (11 yd) in length by 5 meters (5 yd) in width. Four
cones should be on the corners of the 10-meter × 5-meter squar e, with the additional four
placed in the center of the 5-meter width equal ly spaced along the 10-meter length. This will
create three aisles of cones in the order of two, four, and two through which the athlete will
run (figure 14.25).
2. Instruct the athlete to lie prone at the cone to the outside left of the full 10-meter length. The
athlete will be instructed to get up and run when the tester says “Go,” sprint to the cone 10
meters ahead, and then turn ar ound to sprint back to the cones in the middle aisle.
808
3. The athlete then slaloms through the four cones in the center aisle in both directions before
then running to the cone at the opposi te end of the thir d aisle.
4. The athlete sprints the 10 meters of the thir d aisle to complete the test.
5. The tester will stop the timer once the athlete has completed the third aisle of cones and
record the time.
6. Note:  Normativ e data for the Illinois test are presented tables 14.31 and 14.32 near the end of
the chapter .
FIGURE 14.25  Layout for the Il linois test.
Reprinted by permission from R. Lockie, “Testing, Assessment, and Monitoring of Agility and Quickness,” in Developing Agility and Quickness, 2nd ed., edited for the
National Strength and Conditioning Association by J. Dawes (Human Kinetics, 2019), 93.
Speed
  30  STRAIGHT-LINE SPRINT TESTS
Equipment
Stopw atch or timing gates, if available, with correspond ing softw are on a laptop , tablet, or
smartphone appl ication
809
Flat running surface with start and finish lines a specified distance apart (e.g., 40 yd [37 m];
10 m, 20 m, 40 m), wi th at least 20 y ards (18 m) after the finish l ine for deceler ation
Where multiple timing gates are available, set these up to determine additional split times, in
addition to the start and finish lines (e.g., start line, 10 yd [9 m], 20 yd [18 m], finish line at 40
yd [37 m]). This enables greater insight into acceleration capaci ties in addition to the maximal
speed.
Personnel
One timer/r ecorder
Procedure
1. Have the athlete w arm up and dynamical ly stretch f or sev eral minutes.
2. Allow at least two pr actice runs at submaximal speed.
3. The athlete assumes a starting posi tion using a thr ee- or f our-point stance.
4. On an audi tory signal, the athlete sprints the speci fied distance at maximal speed.
5. The best spl it times of two trials ar e recorded to the near est 0.1 second.
6. Allow at least 2 minutes of activ e recovery or r est between trials.
Note:  Normativ e data for the 10-meter (11 yd), 20-meter (22 yd), 40-meter (44 yd), and 40-yard
(37 m) sprint ar e presented in table 14 .33 near the end of the chapter .
Balance and Stability
  31  BALANCE ERROR SCORING SYSTEM (BESS)
Equipment
Foam balance pad
Stopw atch
Personnel
One timer/r ecorder
Procedure
1. The six posi tions of the BES S are shown in figure 14.26.
2. The three stance positions are double-leg stance with feet together , single-leg stance on the
nondominant foot with contralater al leg in approximately  90 degrees of flexion, and tandem
stance with the dominant foot in front of the nondominant foot (128). The test is conducted on
a firm surf ace and on a soft surf ace.
3. The stances ar e held f or 20 seconds wi th eyes closed and hands on hips f or each condi tion.
4. Athletes are told to keep as steady as possible, and if they lose balance, they attempt to regain
their ini tial posi tion as quickly as possible.
5. Errors include opening eyes; lifting the hands from the hips; touchdown of nonstance foot;
step, hop, or other movement of the stance foot or feet; lifting the forefeet or heel; moving
the hip into more than 30 degrees of hip flexion or abduc tion; or remaining out of position for
more than 5 seconds.
6. The err or scor es from the BES S test ar e summed into a single scor e.
Note:  Normativ e data f or the BES S are presented in table 14 .34 near the end of the chapter .
810