# Section 15.1

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 15: Performance Preparation, Mobility, and Flexibility

**Section:** 15.1 -- Warm-Up and Cool-Down

**PDF Pages:** 854--870

CHAPTER  15
PERFORMANCE
PREPARATION, MOBILITY,
AND FLEXIBILITY
Ian Jeffreys, PhD
After completing this chapter, you will be able to
identi fy the components and benefi ts of a pr eperformance
preparation r outine;
structur e effective preperformance pr eparation r outines (w arm-
ups);
identi fy the f actors that af fect flexibi lity;
use flexibi lity exercises that tak e adv antage of pr oprioceptiv e
neuromuscular f acilitation; and
select and apply appr opriate static and dynamic str etching
methods.
This chapter is devoted to two key areas: performance preparation
(warming up) and training for flexibi lity. While these two areas often
have been linked, it is important to differentiate between the two,
because they have distinctly different key functions. A warm-up is
designed to prepare an athlete for performance either in an
upcoming training session or competi tion and where the goal is to
854
optimiz e performance while potential ly lessening the risk of injury .
Flexibi lity training, on the other hand, aims to increase the range of
motion around a joint, normal ly through the use of different forms of
stretching. The first part of this chapter looks at the aims of a warm-
up and suggests appropriate structur es and protocols for designing
effective warm-ups, and the second part discusses factors that affect
flexibi lity and the use of different stretching protocols to enhance
flexibi lity.
855
Performance Preparation—The Warm-
Up
A warm-up period is now almost universally accepted as an integr al
part of any training session or competi tion (10), yet until recently
there was surprisingly little published resear ch to support the
practice (65) and even less on the optimal structur e and content of a
warm-up (48). Essential ly, the overarching goal of a warm-up is to
prepare an athlete mental ly and physical ly for exercise or
competi tion (45). A period of preparation is needed because a body
at rest is unprepared for optimal performance. A period of warming
up facilitates the instigatio n of a range of acute physiological
responses that enable the body to cope with the specific demands
being placed on it (65). Taken together , these acute responses not
only enable the body to cope with these acute demand s but also
facilitate responses that can potential ly optimiz e subsequent
performance. While these processes occur across a number of body
systems, they typical ly can be divided into temper ature-related
effects and non–temper ature-related ef fects (10).
Temper ature-related effects include an increase in muscle
temper ature, core temper ature (62), enhanced neural function, and
the disruption of transient connectiv e tissue bonds (30), while non–
temper ature-related effects can include increased blood flow to
muscles, an elevation of baseline oxygen consumption, and
postactiv ation potentiation (10). While passiv e warm-up techniques
(e.g., external  heating of the muscles) may be able to gener ate
some of the temper ature-related effects, active warm-ups (using
exercises or activity to elicit the required response) are gener ally
preferred and advised becau se they are able to stimulat e both the
temper ature- and non–temper ature-related effects and can also
affect the metabol ic pathways associated with the upcoming activity
(65). While ultimately the exact acute responses will depend on the
856
activity undertak en, the positive effects on performance are thought
to include the f ollowing:
Enhanced muscle fiber contraction frequency , conduction, and
relaxation v elocity of both agonist and antagonist muscles (45)
Improvements in the rate of force development and reaction
time (3)
Improvements in muscle force output, especial ly at higher
velocities (30)
Lower ed viscous r esistance in muscles and joints (30)
Improved oxygen delivery due to the Bohr effect, whereby
higher temper atures facilitate oxygen release from hemog lobin
and m yoglobin (see chapter 6  for mor e detai ls) (62)
Increased blood flow to active muscles through vasodilation
(62)
Enhanced metabolic reactions (30) facilitating energy
transduction including faster ATP turno ver, especial ly in
anaer obic path ways (4)
An incr eased psy chological pr eparedness f or perf ormance (10)
While the number of quality studies investigating the impact of
warm-up on performance is surprisingly low, more than 80% of the
published resear ch has demonstr ated a positive effect on
performance (37, 40). These performance improvements include
enhancement of endur ance performance (both aerobic and
anaer obic), improvements in performance on physical tasks such as
jumping, and in actual sporting perf ormance (37).
Whenev er an analysis of the effects of warm-up is carried out, or
where recommendations as to the optimal form of warm-up are
required, it is crucial to consider that the direct effects will be related
to the structur e and content of the warm-up , the characteristics of
the athletes concerned, and the nature of the subsequent activity
(37). As a result, while gener al findings can be identi fied and
recommendations made, a degree of specificity is required in any
scenario . Consequently , it is highly unlikely that a perfect warm-up
857
exists, and in all probabi lity, a range of warm-ups can be used,
provided that they are structur ed in a way that addresses the
specific physiological, biomechanical, and psychological requirements
of the upcoming activity, take into consider ation the characteristics
of the athletes concerned, and use an approach that exploi ts the
specific acute r esponses to activi ty that can influence perf ormance.
Given that the structure and content of the warm-up
influences potential responses, the warm-up needs to be
planned in relation to the activity to be performed, the
physiological responses required, the characteristics of
the athletes in question, and the logistical requirem ents
of the situation.
In addition to a focus on acute performance, effective warm-ups
traditional ly have been thought to decrease the risk of injury. While
the influence of a warm-up on injury prevention is unclear , the
evidence suggests that positive effects may exist (36, 84, 85). For
example, increased muscle temper ature can increase resistance to
muscle tears (78).
Components of a Warm-Up
While the precise nature of the warm-up will be closely related to
context, an effective warm-up gener ally follows these processes and
is built progressively (46):
A stimu lation of the cardiorespiratory and metabol ic processes
that f acilitate ener gy transduction
A progressive raising of body and working muscle
temper atures
An increase in the range of motion in relation to that required
in the upcoming activi ty
A progressive increase in muscle contraction intensi ty relative
to the activi ties in the upcoming session or competi tion
858
As stated previously, a body at rest is unprepared for activity, and
in this way a warm-up can be consider ed a process of preparation
for the upcoming performance. The conventional advice  is that a
warm-up should consist of a period of aerobic exercise, followed by
some form of stretching, and ending with a period of activity similar
to the upcoming activity (36). A traditional warm-up program
typical ly involves two k ey phases.
The first is a general warm -up period (48), which may consist
of 5 minutes of low-intens ity aerobic activity such as jogging,
skipping, or cycling. The aim of this phase is to increase heart rate,
increase and redistribute blood flow, increase deep muscle
temper ature, increase respiration rate, and decrease the viscosi ty of
joint fluids (28). This phase historical ly has been followed by a
period of gener al static stretching that aims to replicate the ranges
of motio n required for the upcoming activity, although this has been
largely superseded b y dynamic str etching pr otocols (48).
In the traditional approach, following the gener al warm-u p is the
specific warm-up  period, which incorpor ates movements similar to
the biomechanical movement patterns of the athlete’ s sport. This
phase should also include rehearsal of the skills to be performed
(97).
The whole warm-up should progress gradual ly and provide
sufficient intensi ty to increase muscle and core temper atures without
causing fatigue  or reducing energy stores (62). Typical ly, it should
last between 10 and 20 minutes, depending on the specific
requirements of the context. For example, shorter time periods are
far more common in the majori ty of training sessions, while longer
time periods are more common in cases in which aspects of the
warm-up are an integr al part of the main session or when specific
competi tion warm-ups are being carried out. The warm-up should
ideally end no more than 15 minutes before the start of the
subsequent activity; after this time the positive effects of the warm-
up start to dissipate (30).
859
Targeted and Structured Warm-Ups
Activi ties undertak en within warm-ups using this structur e of gener al
and specific warm-ups vary consider ably. Consequently , although
athletes may be performing an appropriately structur ed warm-up ,
this cannot ensure that the warm-up itself adequately addresses the
key variables required to optimiz e subsequent performance (36).
Effective planning needs to carefully consider the specific
requirements of the subsequent performance and how the warm-up
can ensur e that any necessary responses are elicited. Additional ly,
the needs and capaci ties of the athletes should be consider ed and
be planned according to any specific logistical and environmental
factors. It is also important that planning delineates between warm-
ups used before competi tion and the more ubiqui tous warm-ups
used within a training sessio n, because the ultimate objectiv es of
both can be quite different. Whereas the key objectiv e in a
precompeti tion warm-up is to maximiz e performance in that
competi tion, the training warm-up , as well as optimizing acute
performance, can contribute to performance in other productiv e
ways and across a wider range of timescales (49). Subsequently , the
planning process for these is different. For example, planning for
competi tion warm-up is totally focused on the short-term
maximization of performance, whereas training warm-ups can also
consider how the process contributes to the overall development of
the athlete; this planning can therefore entail short-, medium-, and
long-term consider ations (48).
Medium- and long-term planning is a recent trend with regard to
planning effective warm-ups  (50). Athletes spend a great deal of
training time warming up, so structur es that allow optimal use of this
time provide a potential ly powerf ul tool for the coach (51). Effective
warm-ups should be thought of as an integr al part of a training
session, not as a separ ate entity (51). With most training warm-ups
lasting from 10 to 20 minutes, over a training cycle this contributes
to a significant amount of training time; with effective planning, this
860
can contribute greatly to an athlete’ s overall development, as well as
optimal ly preparing the athlete f or the next session (48).
The warm-up is an integral part of the training session.
Strength and conditioning professionals should plan
warm-ups incorporating short-, medium-, and long-term
considerations that will contribute to the overall
development of the athlete.
In recent times, the use of structur ed and standar dized warm-up
systems such as the FIFA 11 has become more prevalent and
emphasiz es medium- and longer -term planning, often with the goal
of injury reduction through the sequenced development of physical
characteristics associated with a reduction in injury risk (2, 5, 33).
The results of these have been encour aging and demonstr ate the
potential for longer term planning of warm-ups to contribute to
athletic development (2, 5). Howev er, despite the success of this
approach, uptake has been surprisingly low; a potential reason for
this has been the standar dized structur e in which activities are
preprescribed that does not al low for flexible appl ication (2).
Whereas structur es such as the FIFA 11 are preprescribed, it is
likely that a range of potential ly effective warm-ups exist (89) and
that these need to be able to adapt to specific situation s and over
time as the needs of the athletes change (89). Rather than use a
single preprescribed approach, a more applicable approach can be to
provide a structur e around which to plan the warm-up , one that
allows for variability and progression. The structur e of gener al and
specific warm-u p, though valid, may need to be supplemented by an
approach that allows for greater targeting of both short- and long-
term performance. One such flexible structur e that has been
adopted by many coaches and that addresses all of the key aspects
of an effective warm-up is the raise, activate  and mobilize, and
potentiate (RAMP) protocol  (51). This builds on the gener al and
specific structur e and provides a suitable approach whereby
861
performance can be maximiz ed in the short, medium, and long term
(51). As the name indicates, raise, activate and mobilize, and
potentiate ar e its three key phases.
The first phase of the RAMP protocol involves activities that raise
the level of key physiological parameters while also focusing on
enhancing the skill level of the athletes. While at first glance this
phase could be consider ed analogous to the gener al warm-up ,
having the aim of elevating body temper ature, heart rate, respiration
rate, blood flow, and joint fluid viscosi ty via low-intensi ty activities, it
is the latter focus on skill development that is very different. Here,
unlike traditional gener al warm-up activities, the focus is not on
generic aerobic exercises to elicit the required physiological
responses but instead to use activities that simulate the movement
patterns of the upcoming activity and develop the movement
patterns or skill patterns the athlete will need to deplo y within the
sport. In this way, the session, from the outset, is specifically
targeted at key movement patterns and skill capaci ties that
contribute to longer term development, as well as providing for the
required physiological effects of the activity (48). This also assists in
the psychological preparation of the athlete for practice or
competi tion because the session constantly addresses components
that r elate to perf ormance.
The second phase, activating and mobilizing, could at first glance
be confused with the static stretching component of a traditional
warm-up . However, here again we see major differences in both the
goal of the phase and subsequently the types of activities chosen.
Here, a longer -term consider ation is played out, whereby the focus is
to develop an athlete’ s movement competency (48). By identi fying
key movement patterns required for athletic performance in both the
subsequent session and in the athlete’ s overall development, such as
squat patterns and lunge patterns, the phase can be built around
the performance of these patterns. The focus here is not on
flexibility  (the range of motion around a joint) as a static
component but on mobility (48). Mobility  involves the capaci ty to
862
move freely and effectively through movements (67) and is a
dynamic quality requiring a combination of motor control, stability,
and flexibi lity; it more closely relates to the movement requirements
an athlete will face in his or her sport and in the gener al activities of
life (51). S ee table 15.1  for a f ull example of a RAMP pr otocol.
Debate persist s as to whether static stretching should be used
within warm-up , and at present the evidence is equiv ocal. Some
reviews of the literature on the effect of static stretching on
performance question the practice (82, 83, 97), suggest ing that it
can compr omise muscle performance (53). Studies have
demonstr ated negativ e effects of static stretching on performance in
a range of parameters such as force production (9, 23-26, 27, 31,
75), power performance (21, 92, 96, 97), running speed (35),
reaction or movement time (8), and strength endur ance (70). It has
been suggested that this may be associated with a reduction in the
stiffness of the musculoten dinous units caused by a change in
intramuscular viscoelastic properties (5, 40) or to a reduction in
efferent neural input to the muscles (40). Howev er, other studies
show no decrement in performance, and a more recent review by
Kay and Blazevich (52) concludes that there is clear evidence that
short-duration static stretching has no detrimental effect on
subsequent performance unless stretches are held for greater than
60 seconds. Simic and cowork ers (86) report that shorter -duration
(<45 s) static stretching bouts result in less performance decrement
but that the performance decrement still exists and may affect
competi tive performance. Therefore, in deciding wheth er to use
static stretchin g within this phase of the warm-up , it is important
that the strength and condi tioning professional perform a benefi t–
risk analysis (59). An important factor to consider in designing this
phase of the warm-up is the types of movements and ranges of
motion required for the upcoming activity. Athletes in sports that
require greater ranges of motion may need to spend more time in
this phase of warm-up and use some elements of static stretching
that may enhance technical elements of performance that depend
863
on range of motion (98), such as gymnasts and martial artists, than
those athletes in sports and activities with a low range of motion
requirement (42, 93). Additional ly, if static stretching is used,
resear ch suggests that following it with a period of more intense
activity may offset an y potential decr ements in perf ormance (6).
Howev er, as highlighted previously , effective warm-up planning
should not be focused solely on short-term consider ations but should
also consider longer term outcomes, and this provides a different
perspectiv e to the debate. Because no consistent link has been
shown between stretching and injury prevention (43, 44, 74, 85,
89), the focus in warm-ups should shift to performance. Exercises
should be designed to contribute to preparation for the upcoming
session but also enhance the athlete’ s overall movement capaci ties.
Exercises that encour age the athlete to develop and use key
movement patterns are ideal activities within this phase of the
warm-up (51).
The use of a range of exercises built around these key movement
patterns provides all of these key advantages while also providing an
opportuni ty to address any specific movement issues an athlete may
demonstr ate (51). Additionally, this approach helps maintain the
temper ature-related benefi ts of the raising phase of the warm-up
(51). Furthermor e, a number  of joints can be integr ated into a single
activity, often including multiplanar movements similar to those that
occur in sport. This integrated approach is also extremely time
efficient, which  can be important when training time is limited (49,
51). These advantages, together with the fact that these dynamic
activities have been shown to improve subsequent running
performance (34, 94), make these types of exercises the preferred
activities during w arming up f or the majori ty of sports (51).
TABLE 15.1  Example Raise, Activate and Mobilize,
and Potentiate Warm-Up Protocol
Phase Action Programming
864
Phase Action Programming
Raise Slow jog 3 × 10 yards
Ankling (see page 675 ) 3 × 10 yards
Exercises perf ormed mo ving
from cone A to cone B and
returnA-walk 2 × 10 yards
Low ampl itude dribble run 2 × 10 yards
Side-shuf fle (see page 659 )2 × 10 yards
Moder ate ampl itude dribble
run2 × 10 yards
A-skip (see page 676 ) 3 × 10 yards
Activation and mobi lization Y’s and T’ s with band
resistance2 × 10 each
Squat wi th overhead r each 10
Lunge wi th overhead side
reach (see page 400 )10
Hip flexion to in verted
hamstring curl10
Straight-leg mar ch (see page
405)6 each leg
Spiderman cr awl (see page
406)2 × 10 yards
Potentiation Squat jump to bo x 2 × 6
Countermo vement jump to
box2 × 6
Low hur dle jump 2 × 5
High hur dle jump 2 × 3
Explosiv e dribble run 2 × 10 yards
Light med bal l slam 3 × 6
First ex ercise pr ogression 3 sets of 4 r eps at 50%,
70%, and 90% of first set
load
865
Phase Action Programming
Note:  For all drills that cover a distance, set up two cones (i.e., cone A and cone B) that
are 10 yards (or meters) apart. Also, any distance measur ed in yards can be the same in
meters; pr ecision is not necessary .
What is crucial to note at this point is that while the first two
phases have moved the body from a state of rest to a more
prepared state, it is still unprepared for maximal performance,
especial ly in activities that require high levels of force or speed
application. This is why a warm-up must include a progressive
sequence of exercises that increase the intensi ty of activity up to a
level that will be experienced in the upcoming activity or sport; this
is the potentiation phase. While this third phase, potentiation ,
could be consider ed as analogous to the specific warm-up , crucial ly
its focus on the progressive intensi ty of activities is different. The
quality of muscle contraction depends on its contractile history , and
there exists a staircase or treppe effect, where consecutiv e
contractions result in a net increase in contractile force (47, 60). This
contractile history makes the motor neuron more sensitive to action
potentials, allowing muscle to be activated with decreased neural
input (47). This phase therefore deplo ys sport-speci fic or fitness
capaci ty–speci fic (e.g., speed and agility exercises) activities that
demonstr ate a staged increase in intensi ty until the athlete is
performing at the intensi ty required for the subsequent competi tion
or training session. This phase is critical to subsequent performance,
especial ly in activities that require high levels of speed, strength, and
power , yet it is often, and surprisingly , omitted from traditional
warm-ups. Indeed, the more speed or power necessary for the sport
or activity, the more important the potentiation phase of warm-up
(17), and including high-inte nsity dynamic exercises can facilitate
subsequent performance (11, 14, 32, 96). Competi tion warm-up
should include a progression of sport-speci fic activities that enable
the athlete to maximiz e performance physiological ly and
psychological ly (11). For the training warm-up , this can be targeted
866
to the upcoming session yet can also address the longer -term
requirements of the athlete (48). With effective planning, this phase
of the warm-up can be a key part of a training session, presenting
an ideal opportuni ty to work on aspects of performance such as
plyometrics, speed, and agility (51). Effective planning of this phase
can allow consider able training time to be spent on key components
of fitness without an overall increase in training duration (51).
Indeed, it is this phase that ultimately determines the optimal length
of the warm-up , because the potentiation phase can become a key
part of the session, allowing the delivery of elements such as speed
training and agility training; in these instances, the entire warm-up
will be longer  but will progress almost seamlessly to the main
session.
Central Nervous System Preparatory
Exercises
The potentiation phase of the warm-up is predicated on the history -
dependent nature of muscle force production and involves a
progressive series of exercises up to the intensi ty of the upcoming
activity. This typical ly uses exercises similar to those in the main
activity (e.g., a series of sprints before a footbal l session). Howev er,
this history dependence also raises an important question: If a series
of activities up to maximal intensi ty can elicit an enhanced neural
output (e.g., enhanced motor unit recruitment or enhanced rate
coding) and facilitate performance, can the use of augmented
activities enhan ce this even further? This is the premise of a central
nervous system (CNS) preparatory exercise , when a range of
potential activities are used with the goal of enhancing preparedness
for another activity via a positive transient performance response
(45). Resear ch suggests that an acute stimulus of low-volume
exercise can acutely enhance  neuromuscular performance, a concept
known as postactivation performance enhancement  (PAPE),
and outlines the potential for residual force enhancement  from prior
activity (45).
867
The potential for residual force enhancement through CNS
stimulation has been attributed to a range of physiological
mechanisms, including the phosphorylation of myosin light chains,
pennation angle changes in a muscle, recruitment of higher
threshold motor units, and enhancement of the H-wave amplitude
(91). It has also been suggested that PAPE could be attributed to an
increase in the quanti ty of neurotransmi tters released and their
efficiency , resulting in enhanced muscle contractions together with
an elevation in excitation potentials across synaptic junctions at the
spinal cord (40, 91). Howev er, no defini tive answer emerges as to
the mechanism s by which PAPE is elicited, and with so many
potential contributory mecha nisms, it is expected that there will be
great variation in both the optimal stimulus and the probable
response of an individual to any protocol. This potential individual ity
of response is made more probable by the fact that the
precondi tioning activity does not only have the potential to gener ate
PAPE; it also has the potential to gener ate fatigue (the fitness
fatigue theory). This balance between potentiation and fatigue must
always be kept in mind when designing PAPE-based activities—
indeed, thr oughout the design of a w arm-up .
A range of modal ities have been purported as having the potential
to stimulate PAPE, including resistance training exercises, variable
resistance exercise, isometri c contractions, resisted sprinting, and
assisted sprinting (72), with the majori ty of modal ities reporting
subsequent effects of sprint and/or jump performance (55). Most
resear ch into PAPE has focused on the use of heavy resistance
exercise, predominantly at intensi ties of between 60% and 90%
1RM and using exercises such as the back squat. Similarly, the use
of isometric muscle actions at a range of positions has been
investigated. Howev er, the challenge of this modal ity is its
application given the necessi ty for equipment and the associated
time to get athletes through the protocols. As a result, a more recent
focus has been on the use of activities that are potential ly more
applicable such as r esisted sprinting and ply ometrics.
868
Across all protocols, the evidence to support the use of PAPE
exercises is equiv ocal, with great variation on most modal ities. Here
the interaction of potentiation  and fatigue will always be a challenge;
for example, the activities that may gener ate the greatest
potentiation are also those that are likely to result in the greatest
fatigue. Defini tive conclusions are made even harder by the variation
in the warm-up  used in the studies and whether the positive results
are as much a result of an effective potentiation phase rather than
evidence of PAPE. To further challenge the application of the
phenomenon, it appears that the effects are also highly individual
and relate to the interaction of a range of factors, such as the type
of stimulus, the intensi ty of the stimulus, the volume of the stimulus,
the time duration between stimulation and application, and the
individual characteristics of the athlete. As a result, defini tive
guidel ines on the application of PAPE in any warm-up  (see the
sidebar ) should be consider ed tentativ e at best.
Much of the current resear ch has focused on the acute application
of CNS preparation. Howev er, some resear ch suggests that the
positive effects of a bout of high-intensi ty exercise may last
significantly longer than the windows that have been explor ed to
date—perhaps up to 48 hours. As a result, the concept of
precompeti tion priming has been proposed, using a low-volume,
high-intensi ty session some hours or even days before a competi tion
to prime the CNS, allowing for the exploi tation of a potent ial residual
force enhance ment (45). Howev er, the resear ch on this is limited
and does not fall under the purview of this chapter , where the focus
will be on the use of CNS pr eparation in a w arm-up .
While the use of PAPE in warm-ups may be alluring, the logistical
challenges are many and often preclude effective application (55).
Given the highly individual nature of PAPE, finding a single effective
modal ity for a team of athletes will be extremely difficult, and as a
result this application may be more suited to individu al athletes
rather than teams. Even here, logistical and operational
consider ations have to be taken into account. Equipment availability
869
at venues, time restrictions of when athletes need to be at certain
positions, and so on limit the potential to apply modal ities that
require equipment, such as resistance training modal ities, and it may
be more prudent to look at methods that are more user friendly and
can be incorpo rated into current warm-up modal ities, such as the
application of plyometrics. Here consider ation needs to be placed not
just on what modal ity gener ates the greatest potential enhancement
but also on what can be effectively applied into warm-u p routines.
Throughout this analysis the potential for residual fatigue gener ation
must be consider ed, which may outweigh the positive impact over
an extended time period.
In terms of using PAPE within a training session warm-up , the
interindividual differences will always present a challenge. What is
important is that the case for PAPE does not blind the strength and
condi tioning professional to the overall goals of a session. For
example, if a heavy squat stimulus was used to prime a jump
performance but a rest period of 12 minutes was required to
optimiz e the effect, the net effect on training volume within the
session may far outweigh the potential ly positive effects of PAPE.
What is more likely is that the use of contrast-type methodologies in
activities that may gener ate less PAPE but also require less recovery
time between the precondi tioning activity and the main activity may
be more applicable. At this time, PAPE is an alluring concept but one
still being studied for effective application. See tables 15.2 and 15.3
for examples of CNS pr eparatory ex ercise combinations.
TABLE 15.2  Lower Body CNS Preparatory Exercise
Combinations
Preconditioning activity Variables Main activity
Back squat (see page 439 ) Load: 60%-90% 1RM
Sets: 1-3
Reps: 1-3Countermo vement jump
Note:  These are examples; the precise pre- and postcondi tioning activity should be
adjusted to suit the needs of the session. Similarly, the precise variabl es should be
adjusted to the needs of the athlete and the activi ty.
870