# Chapter 15: Performance Preparation, Mobility, and Flexibility

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

**PDF Pages:** 854--946

CHAPTER  15
PERFORMANCE
PREPARATION, MOBILITY,
AND FLEXIBILITY
Ian Jeffreys, PhD
After completing this chapter, you will be able to
identi fy the components and benefi ts of a pr eperformance
preparation r outine;
structur e effective preperformance pr eparation r outines (w arm-
ups);
identi fy the f actors that af fect flexibi lity;
use flexibi lity exercises that tak e adv antage of pr oprioceptiv e
neuromuscular f acilitation; and
select and apply appr opriate static and dynamic str etching
methods.
This chapter is devoted to two key areas: performance preparation
(warming up) and training for flexibi lity. While these two areas often
have been linked, it is important to differentiate between the two,
because they have distinctly different key functions. A warm-up is
designed to prepare an athlete for performance either in an
upcoming training session or competi tion and where the goal is to
854
optimiz e performance while potential ly lessening the risk of injury .
Flexibi lity training, on the other hand, aims to increase the range of
motion around a joint, normal ly through the use of different forms of
stretching. The first part of this chapter looks at the aims of a warm-
up and suggests appropriate structur es and protocols for designing
effective warm-ups, and the second part discusses factors that affect
flexibi lity and the use of different stretching protocols to enhance
flexibi lity.
855
Performance Preparation—The Warm-
Up
A warm-up period is now almost universally accepted as an integr al
part of any training session or competi tion (10), yet until recently
there was surprisingly little published resear ch to support the
practice (65) and even less on the optimal structur e and content of a
warm-up (48). Essential ly, the overarching goal of a warm-up is to
prepare an athlete mental ly and physical ly for exercise or
competi tion (45). A period of preparation is needed because a body
at rest is unprepared for optimal performance. A period of warming
up facilitates the instigatio n of a range of acute physiological
responses that enable the body to cope with the specific demands
being placed on it (65). Taken together , these acute responses not
only enable the body to cope with these acute demand s but also
facilitate responses that can potential ly optimiz e subsequent
performance. While these processes occur across a number of body
systems, they typical ly can be divided into temper ature-related
effects and non–temper ature-related ef fects (10).
Temper ature-related effects include an increase in muscle
temper ature, core temper ature (62), enhanced neural function, and
the disruption of transient connectiv e tissue bonds (30), while non–
temper ature-related effects can include increased blood flow to
muscles, an elevation of baseline oxygen consumption, and
postactiv ation potentiation (10). While passiv e warm-up techniques
(e.g., external  heating of the muscles) may be able to gener ate
some of the temper ature-related effects, active warm-ups (using
exercises or activity to elicit the required response) are gener ally
preferred and advised becau se they are able to stimulat e both the
temper ature- and non–temper ature-related effects and can also
affect the metabol ic pathways associated with the upcoming activity
(65). While ultimately the exact acute responses will depend on the
856
activity undertak en, the positive effects on performance are thought
to include the f ollowing:
Enhanced muscle fiber contraction frequency , conduction, and
relaxation v elocity of both agonist and antagonist muscles (45)
Improvements in the rate of force development and reaction
time (3)
Improvements in muscle force output, especial ly at higher
velocities (30)
Lower ed viscous r esistance in muscles and joints (30)
Improved oxygen delivery due to the Bohr effect, whereby
higher temper atures facilitate oxygen release from hemog lobin
and m yoglobin (see chapter 6  for mor e detai ls) (62)
Increased blood flow to active muscles through vasodilation
(62)
Enhanced metabolic reactions (30) facilitating energy
transduction including faster ATP turno ver, especial ly in
anaer obic path ways (4)
An incr eased psy chological pr eparedness f or perf ormance (10)
While the number of quality studies investigating the impact of
warm-up on performance is surprisingly low, more than 80% of the
published resear ch has demonstr ated a positive effect on
performance (37, 40). These performance improvements include
enhancement of endur ance performance (both aerobic and
anaer obic), improvements in performance on physical tasks such as
jumping, and in actual sporting perf ormance (37).
Whenev er an analysis of the effects of warm-up is carried out, or
where recommendations as to the optimal form of warm-up are
required, it is crucial to consider that the direct effects will be related
to the structur e and content of the warm-up , the characteristics of
the athletes concerned, and the nature of the subsequent activity
(37). As a result, while gener al findings can be identi fied and
recommendations made, a degree of specificity is required in any
scenario . Consequently , it is highly unlikely that a perfect warm-up
857
exists, and in all probabi lity, a range of warm-ups can be used,
provided that they are structur ed in a way that addresses the
specific physiological, biomechanical, and psychological requirements
of the upcoming activity, take into consider ation the characteristics
of the athletes concerned, and use an approach that exploi ts the
specific acute r esponses to activi ty that can influence perf ormance.
Given that the structure and content of the warm-up
influences potential responses, the warm-up needs to be
planned in relation to the activity to be performed, the
physiological responses required, the characteristics of
the athletes in question, and the logistical requirem ents
of the situation.
In addition to a focus on acute performance, effective warm-ups
traditional ly have been thought to decrease the risk of injury. While
the influence of a warm-up on injury prevention is unclear , the
evidence suggests that positive effects may exist (36, 84, 85). For
example, increased muscle temper ature can increase resistance to
muscle tears (78).
Components of a Warm-Up
While the precise nature of the warm-up will be closely related to
context, an effective warm-up gener ally follows these processes and
is built progressively (46):
A stimu lation of the cardiorespiratory and metabol ic processes
that f acilitate ener gy transduction
A progressive raising of body and working muscle
temper atures
An increase in the range of motion in relation to that required
in the upcoming activi ty
A progressive increase in muscle contraction intensi ty relative
to the activi ties in the upcoming session or competi tion
858
As stated previously, a body at rest is unprepared for activity, and
in this way a warm-up can be consider ed a process of preparation
for the upcoming performance. The conventional advice  is that a
warm-up should consist of a period of aerobic exercise, followed by
some form of stretching, and ending with a period of activity similar
to the upcoming activity (36). A traditional warm-up program
typical ly involves two k ey phases.
The first is a general warm -up period (48), which may consist
of 5 minutes of low-intens ity aerobic activity such as jogging,
skipping, or cycling. The aim of this phase is to increase heart rate,
increase and redistribute blood flow, increase deep muscle
temper ature, increase respiration rate, and decrease the viscosi ty of
joint fluids (28). This phase historical ly has been followed by a
period of gener al static stretching that aims to replicate the ranges
of motio n required for the upcoming activity, although this has been
largely superseded b y dynamic str etching pr otocols (48).
In the traditional approach, following the gener al warm-u p is the
specific warm-up  period, which incorpor ates movements similar to
the biomechanical movement patterns of the athlete’ s sport. This
phase should also include rehearsal of the skills to be performed
(97).
The whole warm-up should progress gradual ly and provide
sufficient intensi ty to increase muscle and core temper atures without
causing fatigue  or reducing energy stores (62). Typical ly, it should
last between 10 and 20 minutes, depending on the specific
requirements of the context. For example, shorter time periods are
far more common in the majori ty of training sessions, while longer
time periods are more common in cases in which aspects of the
warm-up are an integr al part of the main session or when specific
competi tion warm-ups are being carried out. The warm-up should
ideally end no more than 15 minutes before the start of the
subsequent activity; after this time the positive effects of the warm-
up start to dissipate (30).
859
Targeted and Structured Warm-Ups
Activi ties undertak en within warm-ups using this structur e of gener al
and specific warm-ups vary consider ably. Consequently , although
athletes may be performing an appropriately structur ed warm-up ,
this cannot ensure that the warm-up itself adequately addresses the
key variables required to optimiz e subsequent performance (36).
Effective planning needs to carefully consider the specific
requirements of the subsequent performance and how the warm-up
can ensur e that any necessary responses are elicited. Additional ly,
the needs and capaci ties of the athletes should be consider ed and
be planned according to any specific logistical and environmental
factors. It is also important that planning delineates between warm-
ups used before competi tion and the more ubiqui tous warm-ups
used within a training sessio n, because the ultimate objectiv es of
both can be quite different. Whereas the key objectiv e in a
precompeti tion warm-up is to maximiz e performance in that
competi tion, the training warm-up , as well as optimizing acute
performance, can contribute to performance in other productiv e
ways and across a wider range of timescales (49). Subsequently , the
planning process for these is different. For example, planning for
competi tion warm-up is totally focused on the short-term
maximization of performance, whereas training warm-ups can also
consider how the process contributes to the overall development of
the athlete; this planning can therefore entail short-, medium-, and
long-term consider ations (48).
Medium- and long-term planning is a recent trend with regard to
planning effective warm-ups  (50). Athletes spend a great deal of
training time warming up, so structur es that allow optimal use of this
time provide a potential ly powerf ul tool for the coach (51). Effective
warm-ups should be thought of as an integr al part of a training
session, not as a separ ate entity (51). With most training warm-ups
lasting from 10 to 20 minutes, over a training cycle this contributes
to a significant amount of training time; with effective planning, this
860
can contribute greatly to an athlete’ s overall development, as well as
optimal ly preparing the athlete f or the next session (48).
The warm-up is an integral part of the training session.
Strength and conditioning professionals should plan
warm-ups incorporating short-, medium-, and long-term
considerations that will contribute to the overall
development of the athlete.
In recent times, the use of structur ed and standar dized warm-up
systems such as the FIFA 11 has become more prevalent and
emphasiz es medium- and longer -term planning, often with the goal
of injury reduction through the sequenced development of physical
characteristics associated with a reduction in injury risk (2, 5, 33).
The results of these have been encour aging and demonstr ate the
potential for longer term planning of warm-ups to contribute to
athletic development (2, 5). Howev er, despite the success of this
approach, uptake has been surprisingly low; a potential reason for
this has been the standar dized structur e in which activities are
preprescribed that does not al low for flexible appl ication (2).
Whereas structur es such as the FIFA 11 are preprescribed, it is
likely that a range of potential ly effective warm-ups exist (89) and
that these need to be able to adapt to specific situation s and over
time as the needs of the athletes change (89). Rather than use a
single preprescribed approach, a more applicable approach can be to
provide a structur e around which to plan the warm-up , one that
allows for variability and progression. The structur e of gener al and
specific warm-u p, though valid, may need to be supplemented by an
approach that allows for greater targeting of both short- and long-
term performance. One such flexible structur e that has been
adopted by many coaches and that addresses all of the key aspects
of an effective warm-up is the raise, activate  and mobilize, and
potentiate (RAMP) protocol  (51). This builds on the gener al and
specific structur e and provides a suitable approach whereby
861
performance can be maximiz ed in the short, medium, and long term
(51). As the name indicates, raise, activate and mobilize, and
potentiate ar e its three key phases.
The first phase of the RAMP protocol involves activities that raise
the level of key physiological parameters while also focusing on
enhancing the skill level of the athletes. While at first glance this
phase could be consider ed analogous to the gener al warm-up ,
having the aim of elevating body temper ature, heart rate, respiration
rate, blood flow, and joint fluid viscosi ty via low-intensi ty activities, it
is the latter focus on skill development that is very different. Here,
unlike traditional gener al warm-up activities, the focus is not on
generic aerobic exercises to elicit the required physiological
responses but instead to use activities that simulate the movement
patterns of the upcoming activity and develop the movement
patterns or skill patterns the athlete will need to deplo y within the
sport. In this way, the session, from the outset, is specifically
targeted at key movement patterns and skill capaci ties that
contribute to longer term development, as well as providing for the
required physiological effects of the activity (48). This also assists in
the psychological preparation of the athlete for practice or
competi tion because the session constantly addresses components
that r elate to perf ormance.
The second phase, activating and mobilizing, could at first glance
be confused with the static stretching component of a traditional
warm-up . However, here again we see major differences in both the
goal of the phase and subsequently the types of activities chosen.
Here, a longer -term consider ation is played out, whereby the focus is
to develop an athlete’ s movement competency (48). By identi fying
key movement patterns required for athletic performance in both the
subsequent session and in the athlete’ s overall development, such as
squat patterns and lunge patterns, the phase can be built around
the performance of these patterns. The focus here is not on
flexibility  (the range of motion around a joint) as a static
component but on mobility (48). Mobility  involves the capaci ty to
862
move freely and effectively through movements (67) and is a
dynamic quality requiring a combination of motor control, stability,
and flexibi lity; it more closely relates to the movement requirements
an athlete will face in his or her sport and in the gener al activities of
life (51). S ee table 15.1  for a f ull example of a RAMP pr otocol.
Debate persist s as to whether static stretching should be used
within warm-up , and at present the evidence is equiv ocal. Some
reviews of the literature on the effect of static stretching on
performance question the practice (82, 83, 97), suggest ing that it
can compr omise muscle performance (53). Studies have
demonstr ated negativ e effects of static stretching on performance in
a range of parameters such as force production (9, 23-26, 27, 31,
75), power performance (21, 92, 96, 97), running speed (35),
reaction or movement time (8), and strength endur ance (70). It has
been suggested that this may be associated with a reduction in the
stiffness of the musculoten dinous units caused by a change in
intramuscular viscoelastic properties (5, 40) or to a reduction in
efferent neural input to the muscles (40). Howev er, other studies
show no decrement in performance, and a more recent review by
Kay and Blazevich (52) concludes that there is clear evidence that
short-duration static stretching has no detrimental effect on
subsequent performance unless stretches are held for greater than
60 seconds. Simic and cowork ers (86) report that shorter -duration
(<45 s) static stretching bouts result in less performance decrement
but that the performance decrement still exists and may affect
competi tive performance. Therefore, in deciding wheth er to use
static stretchin g within this phase of the warm-up , it is important
that the strength and condi tioning professional perform a benefi t–
risk analysis (59). An important factor to consider in designing this
phase of the warm-up is the types of movements and ranges of
motion required for the upcoming activity. Athletes in sports that
require greater ranges of motion may need to spend more time in
this phase of warm-up and use some elements of static stretching
that may enhance technical elements of performance that depend
863
on range of motion (98), such as gymnasts and martial artists, than
those athletes in sports and activities with a low range of motion
requirement (42, 93). Additional ly, if static stretching is used,
resear ch suggests that following it with a period of more intense
activity may offset an y potential decr ements in perf ormance (6).
Howev er, as highlighted previously , effective warm-up planning
should not be focused solely on short-term consider ations but should
also consider longer term outcomes, and this provides a different
perspectiv e to the debate. Because no consistent link has been
shown between stretching and injury prevention (43, 44, 74, 85,
89), the focus in warm-ups should shift to performance. Exercises
should be designed to contribute to preparation for the upcoming
session but also enhance the athlete’ s overall movement capaci ties.
Exercises that encour age the athlete to develop and use key
movement patterns are ideal activities within this phase of the
warm-up (51).
The use of a range of exercises built around these key movement
patterns provides all of these key advantages while also providing an
opportuni ty to address any specific movement issues an athlete may
demonstr ate (51). Additionally, this approach helps maintain the
temper ature-related benefi ts of the raising phase of the warm-up
(51). Furthermor e, a number  of joints can be integr ated into a single
activity, often including multiplanar movements similar to those that
occur in sport. This integrated approach is also extremely time
efficient, which  can be important when training time is limited (49,
51). These advantages, together with the fact that these dynamic
activities have been shown to improve subsequent running
performance (34, 94), make these types of exercises the preferred
activities during w arming up f or the majori ty of sports (51).
TABLE 15.1  Example Raise, Activate and Mobilize,
and Potentiate Warm-Up Protocol
Phase Action Programming
864
Phase Action Programming
Raise Slow jog 3 × 10 yards
Ankling (see page 675 ) 3 × 10 yards
Exercises perf ormed mo ving
from cone A to cone B and
returnA-walk 2 × 10 yards
Low ampl itude dribble run 2 × 10 yards
Side-shuf fle (see page 659 )2 × 10 yards
Moder ate ampl itude dribble
run2 × 10 yards
A-skip (see page 676 ) 3 × 10 yards
Activation and mobi lization Y’s and T’ s with band
resistance2 × 10 each
Squat wi th overhead r each 10
Lunge wi th overhead side
reach (see page 400 )10
Hip flexion to in verted
hamstring curl10
Straight-leg mar ch (see page
405)6 each leg
Spiderman cr awl (see page
406)2 × 10 yards
Potentiation Squat jump to bo x 2 × 6
Countermo vement jump to
box2 × 6
Low hur dle jump 2 × 5
High hur dle jump 2 × 3
Explosiv e dribble run 2 × 10 yards
Light med bal l slam 3 × 6
First ex ercise pr ogression 3 sets of 4 r eps at 50%,
70%, and 90% of first set
load
865
Phase Action Programming
Note:  For all drills that cover a distance, set up two cones (i.e., cone A and cone B) that
are 10 yards (or meters) apart. Also, any distance measur ed in yards can be the same in
meters; pr ecision is not necessary .
What is crucial to note at this point is that while the first two
phases have moved the body from a state of rest to a more
prepared state, it is still unprepared for maximal performance,
especial ly in activities that require high levels of force or speed
application. This is why a warm-up must include a progressive
sequence of exercises that increase the intensi ty of activity up to a
level that will be experienced in the upcoming activity or sport; this
is the potentiation phase. While this third phase, potentiation ,
could be consider ed as analogous to the specific warm-up , crucial ly
its focus on the progressive intensi ty of activities is different. The
quality of muscle contraction depends on its contractile history , and
there exists a staircase or treppe effect, where consecutiv e
contractions result in a net increase in contractile force (47, 60). This
contractile history makes the motor neuron more sensitive to action
potentials, allowing muscle to be activated with decreased neural
input (47). This phase therefore deplo ys sport-speci fic or fitness
capaci ty–speci fic (e.g., speed and agility exercises) activities that
demonstr ate a staged increase in intensi ty until the athlete is
performing at the intensi ty required for the subsequent competi tion
or training session. This phase is critical to subsequent performance,
especial ly in activities that require high levels of speed, strength, and
power , yet it is often, and surprisingly , omitted from traditional
warm-ups. Indeed, the more speed or power necessary for the sport
or activity, the more important the potentiation phase of warm-up
(17), and including high-inte nsity dynamic exercises can facilitate
subsequent performance (11, 14, 32, 96). Competi tion warm-up
should include a progression of sport-speci fic activities that enable
the athlete to maximiz e performance physiological ly and
psychological ly (11). For the training warm-up , this can be targeted
866
to the upcoming session yet can also address the longer -term
requirements of the athlete (48). With effective planning, this phase
of the warm-up can be a key part of a training session, presenting
an ideal opportuni ty to work on aspects of performance such as
plyometrics, speed, and agility (51). Effective planning of this phase
can allow consider able training time to be spent on key components
of fitness without an overall increase in training duration (51).
Indeed, it is this phase that ultimately determines the optimal length
of the warm-up , because the potentiation phase can become a key
part of the session, allowing the delivery of elements such as speed
training and agility training; in these instances, the entire warm-up
will be longer  but will progress almost seamlessly to the main
session.
Central Nervous System Preparatory
Exercises
The potentiation phase of the warm-up is predicated on the history -
dependent nature of muscle force production and involves a
progressive series of exercises up to the intensi ty of the upcoming
activity. This typical ly uses exercises similar to those in the main
activity (e.g., a series of sprints before a footbal l session). Howev er,
this history dependence also raises an important question: If a series
of activities up to maximal intensi ty can elicit an enhanced neural
output (e.g., enhanced motor unit recruitment or enhanced rate
coding) and facilitate performance, can the use of augmented
activities enhan ce this even further? This is the premise of a central
nervous system (CNS) preparatory exercise , when a range of
potential activities are used with the goal of enhancing preparedness
for another activity via a positive transient performance response
(45). Resear ch suggests that an acute stimulus of low-volume
exercise can acutely enhance  neuromuscular performance, a concept
known as postactivation performance enhancement  (PAPE),
and outlines the potential for residual force enhancement  from prior
activity (45).
867
The potential for residual force enhancement through CNS
stimulation has been attributed to a range of physiological
mechanisms, including the phosphorylation of myosin light chains,
pennation angle changes in a muscle, recruitment of higher
threshold motor units, and enhancement of the H-wave amplitude
(91). It has also been suggested that PAPE could be attributed to an
increase in the quanti ty of neurotransmi tters released and their
efficiency , resulting in enhanced muscle contractions together with
an elevation in excitation potentials across synaptic junctions at the
spinal cord (40, 91). Howev er, no defini tive answer emerges as to
the mechanism s by which PAPE is elicited, and with so many
potential contributory mecha nisms, it is expected that there will be
great variation in both the optimal stimulus and the probable
response of an individual to any protocol. This potential individual ity
of response is made more probable by the fact that the
precondi tioning activity does not only have the potential to gener ate
PAPE; it also has the potential to gener ate fatigue (the fitness
fatigue theory). This balance between potentiation and fatigue must
always be kept in mind when designing PAPE-based activities—
indeed, thr oughout the design of a w arm-up .
A range of modal ities have been purported as having the potential
to stimulate PAPE, including resistance training exercises, variable
resistance exercise, isometri c contractions, resisted sprinting, and
assisted sprinting (72), with the majori ty of modal ities reporting
subsequent effects of sprint and/or jump performance (55). Most
resear ch into PAPE has focused on the use of heavy resistance
exercise, predominantly at intensi ties of between 60% and 90%
1RM and using exercises such as the back squat. Similarly, the use
of isometric muscle actions at a range of positions has been
investigated. Howev er, the challenge of this modal ity is its
application given the necessi ty for equipment and the associated
time to get athletes through the protocols. As a result, a more recent
focus has been on the use of activities that are potential ly more
applicable such as r esisted sprinting and ply ometrics.
868
Across all protocols, the evidence to support the use of PAPE
exercises is equiv ocal, with great variation on most modal ities. Here
the interaction of potentiation  and fatigue will always be a challenge;
for example, the activities that may gener ate the greatest
potentiation are also those that are likely to result in the greatest
fatigue. Defini tive conclusions are made even harder by the variation
in the warm-up  used in the studies and whether the positive results
are as much a result of an effective potentiation phase rather than
evidence of PAPE. To further challenge the application of the
phenomenon, it appears that the effects are also highly individual
and relate to the interaction of a range of factors, such as the type
of stimulus, the intensi ty of the stimulus, the volume of the stimulus,
the time duration between stimulation and application, and the
individual characteristics of the athlete. As a result, defini tive
guidel ines on the application of PAPE in any warm-up  (see the
sidebar ) should be consider ed tentativ e at best.
Much of the current resear ch has focused on the acute application
of CNS preparation. Howev er, some resear ch suggests that the
positive effects of a bout of high-intensi ty exercise may last
significantly longer than the windows that have been explor ed to
date—perhaps up to 48 hours. As a result, the concept of
precompeti tion priming has been proposed, using a low-volume,
high-intensi ty session some hours or even days before a competi tion
to prime the CNS, allowing for the exploi tation of a potent ial residual
force enhance ment (45). Howev er, the resear ch on this is limited
and does not fall under the purview of this chapter , where the focus
will be on the use of CNS pr eparation in a w arm-up .
While the use of PAPE in warm-ups may be alluring, the logistical
challenges are many and often preclude effective application (55).
Given the highly individual nature of PAPE, finding a single effective
modal ity for a team of athletes will be extremely difficult, and as a
result this application may be more suited to individu al athletes
rather than teams. Even here, logistical and operational
consider ations have to be taken into account. Equipment availability
869
at venues, time restrictions of when athletes need to be at certain
positions, and so on limit the potential to apply modal ities that
require equipment, such as resistance training modal ities, and it may
be more prudent to look at methods that are more user friendly and
can be incorpo rated into current warm-up modal ities, such as the
application of plyometrics. Here consider ation needs to be placed not
just on what modal ity gener ates the greatest potential enhancement
but also on what can be effectively applied into warm-u p routines.
Throughout this analysis the potential for residual fatigue gener ation
must be consider ed, which may outweigh the positive impact over
an extended time period.
In terms of using PAPE within a training session warm-up , the
interindividual differences will always present a challenge. What is
important is that the case for PAPE does not blind the strength and
condi tioning professional to the overall goals of a session. For
example, if a heavy squat stimulus was used to prime a jump
performance but a rest period of 12 minutes was required to
optimiz e the effect, the net effect on training volume within the
session may far outweigh the potential ly positive effects of PAPE.
What is more likely is that the use of contrast-type methodologies in
activities that may gener ate less PAPE but also require less recovery
time between the precondi tioning activity and the main activity may
be more applicable. At this time, PAPE is an alluring concept but one
still being studied for effective application. See tables 15.2 and 15.3
for examples of CNS pr eparatory ex ercise combinations.
TABLE 15.2  Lower Body CNS Preparatory Exercise
Combinations
Preconditioning activity Variables Main activity
Back squat (see page 439 ) Load: 60%-90% 1RM
Sets: 1-3
Reps: 1-3Countermo vement jump
Note:  These are examples; the precise pre- and postcondi tioning activity should be
adjusted to suit the needs of the session. Similarly, the precise variabl es should be
adjusted to the needs of the athlete and the activi ty.
870
Preconditioning activity Variables Main activity
Rest bef ore activi ty: 3-12
min
Resisted sprint (see page 684 )Load: 10%-60% body
weight
Distance: 10-25 m (11-27
yd)
Reps: 1-3
Rest bef ore activi ty: 2-5
minSprint
Depth jump (see page 615 ) Load: B ody weight
Height: 30-90 cm (12-35
in.)
Sets: 1-3
Reps: 1-3
Rest bef ore activi ty: 1-5
minCountermo vement jump
Note:  These are examples; the precise pre- and postcondi tioning activity should be
adjusted to suit the needs of the session. Similarly, the precise variabl es should be
adjusted to the needs of the athlete and the activi ty.
TABLE 15.3  Upper Body CNS Preparatory Exercise
Combinations
Preconditioning activity Variables Main activity
Bench pr ess (see page 430 ) Load: 60%-90% 1RM
Sets: 1-3
Reps: 1-3
Rest bef ore activi ty: 3-12 minMedicine bal l throw
Push pr ess (see page 463 ) Load: 40%-80% 1RM
Sets: 1-3
Reps: 1-3
Rest bef ore activi ty: 3-12 minShot put
Note:  These are examples; the precise pre- and postcondi tioning activity should be
adjusted to suit the needs of the session. Similarly, the precise variabl es should be
adjusted to the needs of the athlete and the activi ty.
871
Guidelines a nd Precautions for CNS
Preparatory Exercises
The stimu latory effect is likely greater with well-trained athletes with high
speed and power capaci ties.
Resistance-based protocols likely have the greatest potential for gain but also
the gr eatest potential f or fatigue.
Plyometric and resisted sprint -based exercises may have lower potential but
be mor e accessible f or use in w arm-ups.
Higher intensities will likely gener ate greater potentiation but also greater
fatigue and thus r equire greater r ecovery times.
The closer the similarity between the precondi tioning activity and the main
activity, the higher the l ikely transfer to enhanced perf ormance.
The effects of all protocols will be highly variable and should be prescribed on
an individual basis.
Some athletes ma y not benefi t from CNS stimulation.
The logistical challenges of implementing protocols may outweigh any
potential benefi ts.
Any decision should be based on a wide and compr ehensiv e cost-benefi t
analysis.
872
Flexibility
Flexibi lity is defined as the range of motion (ROM)  that occurs
about a joint. Flexibi lity can be expressed statical ly and dynamical ly.
Static flexibility  refers to the range of possible movement about a
joint (28) and its surrounding muscles during a passiv e movement
(40). Static flexibi lity requires no voluntary muscular activity; an
external force such as gravity, a partner , or a machine provides the
force for a stretch. Dynamic flexibility , on the other hand, refers
to the available ROM during active movements and therefore
requires voluntary muscular  actions. Dynamic ROM is gener ally
greater than static ROM. Howev er, the relationship between static
and dynamic ROM has historical ly been questioned and still remains
largely unresolved, especial ly in relation to the fact that a normal
range of motion cannot guarantee normal movement (19), indicating
that ROM alone cannot determine the quality of any movement.
Therefore, the direct transfer between measur es of static flexibi lity
and sport perf ormance cannot be determined.
In determining the role flexibi lity can play in performance, it is
important to look at the nature of the sport or activity being
undertak en. Given that performance in the majori ty of sports is
dynamic in nature, it is advised to look beyond the role of flexibi lity
as a static quality and instead consider its contribution as a dynamic
quality (66). Here, the concept of mobility introduced earlier can be
a more enlightening term than flexibi lity, naturally reflecting this
dynamic quality. Effective mobility requires the integr ation of aspects
such as balance coordination, postur al control coordination, and
perception (19). In this way, mobility automatical ly frames flexibi lity
as a dynamic quality, with the athlete required to demonstr ate
control, coordination, and force through any demonstr ated ROM,
essential ly being analogou s to dynamic flexibi lity. This is
advantageous when considering the role of flexibi lity on
performance. Indeed, enhanced ROM without appropriate motor
control will not maximiz e perf ormance (80).
873
Flexibility and Performance
Given the lack of a direct link between flexibi lity and movement
capabi lity, optimizing flexibi lity in relation to the specific activity
rather than simply maximiz ing flexibi lity should be the focus of
training (68). Clearly , the direct effects of flexibi lity on performance
therefore depend on the types of activity undertak en, and it is
always importa nt to remember that the most flexible athlete is not
always the most successful (84). Given that different sports and
activities have specific requirements for ROM, it is likely that optimal
levels of flexibi lity exist for each activity, with these related to the
specific movements required within the particular sport or activity,
together with the reduction of any potential injury risk that may
present if an athlete lacks a specific ROM (93). As well as a
consider ation of the ROM itself, it is also important that the strength
and conditioning professional keep in mind the kinetic and kinematic
patterns required within the ROM, because this will also dictate the
types of development methods used. The development of greater
ROM should be linked with the requirements for enhancing
performance, and this often involves the need to apply force over
the required ROM and the ability to assume the key technical
positions required for the sport. In some instances, greater ROM can
be seen as the missing link in the athlete’ s power program, because
the ability to apply force over a greater ROM can increase impulse by
extending the time over which the athlete can apply force, which in
turn contribute s to enhanced performance in a range of sports (61).
Thus, the strength and condi tioning professional should look at the
optimal ROM required of the athlete but also at the underlying goal
of the actions and force patterns required through this ROM, and
where greater ROM is required, this should be in tandem  with the
required force capaci ties to ensur e that the athlete is optimal ly
prepared for perf ormance.
There are clearly optimal ranges of flexibi lity for different sports
and activities, and injury risk may be increased when an athlete is
unable to attain this range. Yet increased ROM is not a panacea, and
874
it is important to note that both inflexibi lity and hyperfle xibility can
increase injury  risk (77, 89). For example, in contact sports, an
excessiv e ROM at the should er or a laxity in the ligaments of the
knee may predispose the athlete to injury in contact situations.
Additional ly, gener al flexibi lity imbalances between joints, which
could incr ease injury risk, must be consider ed (87 , 88).
Factors Affecting Flexibility
A number of anatomical and training-r elated factors affect flexibi lity.
Training canno t alter some factors, such as joint structur e, age, and
sex. Howev er, others can be manipulated and thus are important
consider ations in the design of flexibi lity development programs. A
long-term program of stretching can have cumulativ e positive effects
ranging from enhanced flexibi lity to enhanced strength (80).
Strength and condi tioning professionals should consider each
athlete’ s unique combination of factors and sport requirements when
recommending flexibi lity dev elopment ex ercises and pr ograms.
Joint Structure
The structure of a joint determines its ROM (64). Ball-and-socket
joints , such as the hip and shoulder , move in all anatomical planes
and have the greatest ROM of all joints (64). The wrist is an
ellipsoidal joint (an oval-shaped condyle that fits into an elliptical
cavity), primari ly allowing movement in the sagittal and frontal
planes; its ROM is significant ly less than that of the shoulder or hip
(64). In contrast, the knee is a modified hinge joint, with
movement primarily in the sagittal plane; its ROM is less than that of
either a ball-and-sock et joint or the ellipsoidal wrist joint. The type
of joint, the shapes of the joint’s articulating surfaces, and the soft
tissues surr ounding the joint al l affect its ROM.
Age and Sex
Young people tend to be more flexible than older people (76), and
females tend to be more flexible than males (76). Differences in
875
flexibi lity between young men and women may be due in part to
structur al and anatomical differences and the type and extent of
activities performed. Older people under go a process called fibrosis ,
in which fibrous connectiv e tissue replaces degener ating muscle
fibers (57). This is likely due to inactivi ty and a tendency to use less
of the available ROM during movement. Just as older people can
improve strength, they can improve flexibi lity with appropriate
exercise.
Muscle and Connective Tissue
A range of body tissues can influence flexibi lity. For examp le, factors
such as muscle tissue, the musculotendinous unit (MTU) ,
tendons, ligaments, fascial sheaths, joint capsules, and skin may
limit ROM (28). The relative contributions of these to increased
flexibi lity, both acutely and chronical ly, remain unclear and reflect
the relative impacts of elasticity  and plasticity  (93). Elastici ty
refers to the ability to return to original resting length after a passiv e
stretch, while plastici ty refers to the tendency to assume a new and
greater length after a passiv e stretch. Stretching exercises can
positively affect connectiv e tissues by taking advantage of their
plastic potential, although the relative importance of each tissue type
and the differences between individual responses remains unclear
(12).
Stretch Tolerance
An important factor in determining an athlete’ s flexibi lity is stretch
tolerance, or the ability to tolerate the discomf ort of stretching (84).
Individuals with a greater ROM tend to demonstr ate a greater level
of stretch tolerance and are thus able to tolerate a greater stretch
load (12). One important feature of a regular stretching program is
that it can increase an athlete’s stretch tolerance, thus potential ly
permi tting further incr eases in flexibi lity (7).
876
Neural Control
The control of an athlete’ s ROM is as much determined by central
and peripheral nervous system inputs as by structur al elements (66);
see chapter 1 for more detail. This system includes both afferent and
efferent mech anisms, resulting in both reflexiv e and conscious
activities that ultimately control the ROM an athlete is able to attain
(see the Proprioceptor  sidebars on pages 376 and 378). A key
aspect of an effective flexibi lity program is the capaci ty to positively
affect this system, al lowing f or elicitation of a gr eater ROM.
Resistance Training
A comprehensiv e and proper resistance training program may
increase flexib ility (69) and also assist in the development of force
capaci ty through the enhanced ROM. Effective strength training
protocols should be seen as an important adjunct to a stretching
program (78). Howev er, this comes with two provisos. The first
proviso is that heavy resistan ce training with limited ROM during the
exercises may decrease ROM (28). To prevent loss of ROM, an
athlete should perform exercises that develop both agonist and
antagonist muscles (16) and should exercise through the full
available ROM of the in volved joints.
Muscle Bulk
The second proviso is that a significant increase in muscle  bulk may
adversely affect ROM by impeding joint movement. An athlete with
large biceps and deltoids, for example, may experience difficulty in
stretching the triceps (28), causing difficulty in performing exercises
such as racking a power clean or in performing sport-speci fic skills
such as throwing at high velocities. Although altering the training
program can decrease the amount of muscle bulk, this may not be
advisable for large power athletes such as shot putters or American
footbal l offensive linemen. Strength and condi tioning professionals
should always keep the requirements of the athlete’ s sport in mind:
In some  activities, the need for muscle hypertr ophy may supersede
877
the need for extreme joint mobility, but similarly, where ROM is
crucial, the potential negativ e effects of muscle bulk should be
consider ed and tr aining pr ograms planned ac cordingly .
Activity Level
An active person tends to be more flexible than an inactiv e one,
although it is important to note that it is not activity level alone that
improves flexibility but also the type of activity that influences
flexibi lity (76). Stretching exercises, or exercises requiring the body
to move through a full ROM,  are essential if joint flexibi lity is to be
maintained or increased. Similarly, resistance training, especial ly
using full ranges of motion, can be an effective stimulus to maintain
or increase ROM, and both men and women have successfully
increased their flexibi lity as an outcome of properly designed
resistance tr aining pr ograms (69).
Proprioceptor: Muscle Spindles
The muscle spindles  are located within intrafusal muscle fibers that run parallel
to extrafusal muscle fibers; they monitor changes in muscle length (40). During a
rapid stretching movement, a sensory neuron from the muscle spindle innerv ates a
motor neuron in the spine. The motor  neuron then causes a muscle action of the
previously stretche d extrafusal muscle fibers; this is the stretch reflex .
Stimulation of the muscle spindle and the subsequent activation of the stretch
reflex should be avoided during stretching, because motion will be limited by the
reflexiv e muscle action. If the muscl e spindles are not stimulated, the muscle
relaxes and allows greater stretch. Because of the very slow movement during
static stretching, the stretch reflex is not invoked. Rapid (ballistic and dynamic)
stretching mo vements ma y stimulate the muscle spindles, causing a str etch r eflex.
878
Types of Stretching
Stretching techniques typical ly fall into three broad categories:
static, dynamic, and pr econtr action (73).
Static Stretching
The static stretching approach requires the movement of a body
segment to a point in the ROM where resistance to further
movement is experienced (i.e., the end position). This stretching
action can be performed either actively or passiv ely. An active
stretch  occurs when the person stretching supplies the necessary
forces to enable the end position to be reached. During the sitting
toe touch, for example, the athlete contracts the abdominal muscles
and hip flexors to flex the torso forward to stretch the hamstrings
and low back. A passive stret ch occurs when a partner or a
stretching machine provides external force to cause or enhance a
stretch.
A static stretch  involves a slow and constant movement toward
the end position, which is then held for 10 to 30 seconds (66). This
duration is thought to cause an acute viscoelastic relaxation
response, facilitating relaxation and concurr ent elongation of the
stretched muscle (34). Because it is performed slowly , static
stretching does not elicit the stretch reflex of the stretched muscle
(71); therefore, the likelihood of injury is less than during ballistic
stretching (71). In addition, static stretching is easy to learn and has
been shown to effectively improve ROM (38). Although injury to
muscles or connectiv e tissue  may result if the static stretch is too
intense, there are no real disadvantages to static stretching as long
as proper technique is used.  Static stretching is appropriate for all
athletes in a v ariety of sports f or incr easing flexibi lity.
The sitting toe touch is a good example of a static stretch. To
perform this stretch statical ly, the athlete sits on the ground with the
lower extremities together and knees extended, leans forward from
the waist, and slowly reaches toward the ankles. The athlete
879
gradual ly increases the intensi ty of the stretch by leanin g forward
until he or she feels mild discomf ort in the hamstrings or lower back.
The athlete holds this position for 10 to 30 seconds and then slowly
returns to an upright sitting position. The stretch is static because it
is perf ormed slowly and the end posi tion is held wi thout mo vement.
Dynamic Stretching
Dynamic stretching  is a broad term used to describe actions that
involve active motions where a performer moves actively in a
controlled and moder ate paced manner through a typical ly large
ROM (66). Often this approach is used as a type of functional ly
based stretching exercise that uses sport-generic and sport-speci fic
movements to prepare the body for activity (48). Dynamic stretching
—sometimes referred to as mobility drills  (3)—places an emphasis
on the movement requirements of the sport or activity rather than
on individual muscles. This type of exercise can closely duplicate the
movement requirements of a sport or activity (48); for example, a
walking knee l ift stretch mimics the knee l ift of a sprinter .
The ability to actively move a joint through a ROM is generally far
more sport specific than the ability to statical ly hold a stretch.
Advantages of dynamic stretching include the ability to promote
mobility and to replicate the movement patterns and ROM required
for sport activities. As a conse quence, dynamic stretches, as outlined
in the discussion of warm-up , are increasingly the preferred method
of incr easing the ROM during w arm-up .
In dynamic stretching, unlike static stretching, the muscle does
not relax during the stretch but instead is active through the ROM;
this is also more specific to the movement patterns that occur in
sport. Even though it is an ideal warm-up activity, dynamic
stretching may be less effective than static or proprioceptiv e
neuromuscular facilitation stretching at increasing static ROM (71);
in situations in which an increased static ROM is needed , static or
proprioceptiv e neur omuscular f acilitation methods ma y be pr eferred.
880
When one is designing a dynamic stretching program, the starting
point should be a careful analysis of the major movement patterns
within the given sport as well as an analysis of fundamental
movement patterns that can facilitate performance and the ROM
required within these movements. One can then select exercises that
replicate those movements via a series of dynamic stretches. In this
way, it is possible to achiev e a highly speci fic flexibi lity program.
Dynamic stretching also provides the opportuni ty to combine
movements (48). This gives the strength and conditioning
professional a large number  of combinations that can be used to
provide variety in the warm-up . Athletes can perform dynamic
stretching exercises either for a series of repetitions in the same
place (e.g., 10 lunges) or for a series of repetitions to cover a given
distance (e.g., lunge for 15 m [16 yd]). Regardless of the method
chosen, each drill should start at an appropriate ROM and gradual ly
increase this during subsequent repetitions or sets. Additional ly, the
speed of movement can also be increased but always under a high
level of control. For example, athletes can perform the knee lift
exercise over a distance of 15 meters, starting at a walk and building
to a skip in subsequent r epetitions.
In a dynamic stretch that mirrors a sport skill—such as a sprinter ’s
knee lift drill—it is important that the stretch also emphas ize the key
skill factors required for the movement so that the most important
mechanics of the drill are reinforced. For example, if the knee lift
drill is used in the warm-up , effective body mechanics should be
emphasiz ed along with key joint positions such as dorsiflexion of the
ankle of the lifted foot. The use of dynamic stretches must always be
coordinated with appropriate sport techniques and never
compr omise pr oper technique.
A ballistic stret ch can be consid ered a special type of dynamic
stretch. Ballistic stretches similarly involve active muscular efforts,
but rather than performing these under control, they instead use
intense bounc ing-type movements to achiev e the required ROM
(66). Ballistic stretching, if not appropriately controlled or
881
sequenced, may injure muscles or connectiv e tissues, especial ly
when there has been a previous injury (20). Ballistic stretching
usually triggers the stretch reflex that does not allow the involved
muscles to relax, which may limit ROM, so the strength and
condi tioning pr ofessional should moni tor this during the session.
For example, consider the sitting toe touch performed as a
ballistic stretch rather than a static stretch. The athlete sits on the
ground with knees extended, lower extremities together , and upper
body perpendicular to the legs. The athlete reaches quickly toward
the ankles, bounces at the end position, and immediately returns to
a near-vertical upper body position. With each repetition, the end
position extends farther than in the preceding repetition. Ballistic
stretching has been shown to be as effective as static stretching in
enhancing ROM (58) and could play a role in a flexibi lity
development program (22). However, care must be taken to ensur e
that the athlete is appropriately prepared for this type of exercise
acutely and chronical ly, and special care should be taken when a
previous injury has been r eported.
Dynamic and ballistic stretches may appear similar; howev er, a
number of key differences significantly alter the effects of these
activities such that dynamic stretching avoids the potential negativ e
effects associa ted with ballistic stretching. Dynamic stretching avoids
bouncing and is performed in a more controlled manner than ballistic
stretching. The result is a controlled ROM that is often smaller than
that produced by ballistic stretching but demonstr ates the control
required to be able to actively move through the full ROM and
assume and hold the end posi tion.
Precontraction Stretching
Proprioceptive neuromus cular facilitation (PNF)  is the most
common precontr action stretching methodology . PNF was original ly
developed in the late 1940s as part of a neuromuscular rehabilitation
program designed to relax muscles with increased tone or activity
(1, 81). It has since been expanded to athletics as a method of
882
increasing flexibi lity. PNF techniques are usually performed with a
partner and involve both passiv e movement and active (concentric
and isometric) muscle actions . PNF stretching has been purported as
being superior to other stretching methods for increasing flexibi lity
(81), possibly because it activates the sensory recept ors in the
agonist and antagonist muscles (56), although evidence for this has
not been consistently shown (38, 56). Additional ly, PNF stretching
can often be impractical because most of the stretches require a
partner and some expertise.
During a PNF stretch, three specific muscle actions are used to
facilitate the passiv e stretch. Both isometric and concentric muscle
actions of the antagonist (i.e., the muscle being stretched) are used
before a passiv e stretch of the antagonist to achiev e autogenic
inhibi tion (see the Proprioceptor: Golgi Tendon Organs sidebar on
this page). The isometric muscle action is referred to as hold and the
concentric muscle action as contract. A concentric muscle action  of
the agonist, called agonist contraction , is used during a passiv e
stretch of the antagonist to achiev e reciprocal inhibi tion. Each
technique also involves passiv e, static stretches that are referred to
as relax. When using static contractions, these should be held for
approximately 3 to 6 seconds at no more than 20% of maximum
voluntary contraction, with the first repetition gener ally giving the
greatest benefi t. One or two sessions per week are recommended
(81).
Proprioceptor: Golgi Tendon Organs
The Golgi tendon organs  (GTOs) are sensitive to increases in muscular tension.
When stimulated, the GTO causes a muscle to reflexiv ely relax. Relaxation  that
occurs in the same muscle that is experiencing increased tension is called
autogenic inhibit ion (18, 22). Autogenic inhibi tion is accomplished via active
contraction of a muscle immediately before a passiv e stretch of that same muscle.
Tension built up during the active contraction stimulates the GTO, causing a
reflexiv e relaxation  of the muscle during the subsequent passiv e stretch.
Relaxation that occurs in the muscle opposing the muscle experiencing the
increased tension is called reciprocal inhibit ion (18). This occurs when one
883
simultaneously contracts the muscle opposing the muscle that is being passiv ely
stretched. Here the tension in the contracting muscle stimulates the GTO and
causes a simul taneous r eflexiv e relaxation of the str etched muscle.
There are three basic PNF stretching techniques: hold-r elax (15,
18), contract-relax (15), and hold-r elax with agonist contraction
(18). The techniques are completed in three phases. With each of
the three techniques, the first phase incorpor ates a passiv e
prestretch of 10 seconds. The muscle actions used in the second and
third phases differ for the three techniques; the second  and third
phases giv e each technique i ts name.
The following sections use the hamstring stretch to describe the
three techniques; figures 15.1 and 15.2 show the starting positions
for the athlete and the partner .
FIGURE 15.1  Starting posi tion of PNF hamstring str etch.
884
FIGURE 15.2   Partner and athlete leg and hand posi tions f or PNF hamstring str etch.
Hold-Relax
The hold-relax  technique begins with a passiv e prestretch that is
held at the point of mild discomfort for 10 seconds (figure 15.3). The
partner then applies a hip flexion force and instructs the athlete,
“Hold and do not let me move the leg.” The athlete holds and resists
the movement so that an isometric muscle action occurs and is held
for 6 seconds (figure 15.4). The athlete then relaxes, and a passiv e
stretch is performed and held for 30 seconds (figure 15.5). The final
stretch should be of greater magni tude due to autogenic inhibi tion
(i.e., activ ation of the hamstrings).
885
FIGURE 15.3  Passive prestretch of hamstrings during hold-r elax PNF hamstring str etch.
FIGURE 15.4  Isometric action during hold-r elax PNF hamstring str etch.
886
FIGURE 15.5  Increased ROM during passiv e stretch of hold-r elax PNF hamstring str etch.
Contract-Relax
The contract-relax  technique also begins with a passiv e prestretch
of the hamstrin gs that is held at the point of mild discomf ort for 10
seconds (figure 15.6). The athlete then extends  the hip against
resistance from the partner so that a concentric muscle action
through the full ROM occurs (figure 15.7). The athlete then relaxes,
and a passiv e hip flexion stretch is applied and held for 30 seconds
(figure 15.8) while the athlete concentrical ly contracts the agonist.
The increased ROM is facilitated due to autogenic inhibi tion (i.e.,
activation of the hamstrings).  In an alternativ e to this technique, the
athlete attempts to extend the hip and the partner does not allow
the movement (63). Because this is essential ly the same as the hold-
relax technique, the contract-relax method described  here is
preferred.
Hold-Relax With Agonist Contraction
The hold-relax with agonist contraction  technique is identical to
hold-r elax in the first two phases (figures 15.9 and 15.10 ). During
the third phase, a partner applies force to the antagonist muscle
groups while the athlete is required to maintain the position through
a conce ntric action of the agonist, thus adding to the stretch force
(figure 15.11). Following the isometric hold, the athlete flexes the
887
hip, thereby moving further into the new ROM. With this technique,
the final stretch should be greater, primari ly because of reciprocal
inhibi tion (i.e., activation of the hip flexors) (63) and secondari ly
because of autogenic inhibi tion (i.e., activation of the hamstrings)
(63).
The hold-relax with agonist contraction is the most
effective PNF stretching technique due to facilitation via
both reciprocal and autogenic inhibition.
See pages 407 through 409 for descriptions and photos  of PNF
stretching exercises using a partner for the calves, chest, groin,
quadriceps and hip flex ors, and shoulders.
FIGURE 15.6  Passive prestretch of hamstrings during contr act-relax PNF str etch.
888
FIGURE 15.7  Concentric action of hip extensors during contr act-relax PNF str etch.
FIGURE 15.8  Increased ROM during passiv e stretch of contr act-relax PNF str etch.
889
FIGURE 15.9 Passive prestretch during hold-r elax with agonist contraction PNF
hamstring str etch.
FIGURE 15.10  Isometric action of hamstrings during hold-r elax with agonist contraction
PNF hamstring str etch.
890
FIGURE 15.11  Concentric contraction of quadriceps during hold-r elax with agonist
contraction PNF hamstring str etch, cr eating incr eased ROM during passiv e stretch.
891
Programming Considerations for
Stretching
As with all forms of training, frequency , duration, and intensi ty are
important issues in program design (26). Both static and
precontr action stretching have been shown to increase joint
flexibi lity around the knee, hip, trunk, shoulder , and ankle joints (56,
89), although doubt remains as to which protocols elicit the greatest
effects (56). This is further compl icated by the fact that the exact
mechanisms responsible for increased flexibi lity are still unclear . The
acute effects of stretching on ROM are transient and are greatest
immediately after the stretching session; then they decline, with the
duration of significant improvements in flexibi lity ranging from 3
minutes (27) to 24 hours (29).
For longer-lasting effects, a dedicated flexibi lity program is
required (89), and improvements in flexibi lity have been shown with
short-term interv entions ranging from two to eight weeks (38),
Interestingly , time stretching  per week seems to have a greater
impact than time spent stretching within a single session, suggesting
that frequency rather than duration may be a more important factor
(90). It is important to note that PNF stretching may be an exception
to this, where a single session per week may be optim al (66). In
terms of intensi ty of stretching, higher intensi ties do not appear to
have any additional benefi t over less intense methods (54). Howev er,
it is not clear whether this applies when extreme flexibi lity is needed
(54).
As to the appropriate duration for a static stretch, 15 to 30
seconds is gener ally recommended (81) and has been shown to be
more effective than shorter durations (66). Evidence supports the
use of 30 seconds (4-6) and suggests diminishing returns beyond
this duration. Another consider ation is that the total stretch time
throughout a day may be as important as the duration of a single
stretch (17), further emphasizing the potential importance of
892
frequency as a key factor in program design. When performing static
stretches, athletes should hold the stretch at a position of mild
discomf ort (not pain); joint integri ty should never be compr omised
to increase ROM. All stretching sessions should be preceded by a
period of gener al activity to raise muscle temper ature. Because
neural and vascular struct ures are stretched during  flexibi lity
exercises, athletes should be monitored for a loss of sensation or
radiating pain.
As a gener al guidel ine, stretching at the following times can
provide optimal benefi ts:
Following practice and competi tion. Postpractice stretching
potential ly facilitates ROM improvements (40), although the
evidence for this is mixed (79). It should be performed within
5 to 10 minutes after practice. The increased body
temper ature increases the elastic properties of collagen within
muscles and tendons, which potential ly allows for a greater
stretch magni tude. Postpractice stretching may also decrease
muscle soreness, although the evidence on this is again
ambiguous (59, 79).
As a separ ate session . If increased  levels of flexibi lity are
required, additional stretching sessions may be needed. In this
case, stretching should be preceded by a thorough gener al
warm-up to allow for the increase in muscle temper ature
necessary for effective stretching. This type of session can be
especial ly useful as a recovery session on the day after a
competi tion.
893
Conclusion
A warm-up can provide benefi ts that enhance subsequent
performance. Warm-up should be geared toward the particular sport
or activity and should use an appropriate structur e, ensuring that an
athlete is optimal ly prepared for subsequent activity. Effective warm-
up planning can ensur e that the activities prepare the athlete for the
upcoming session but do not induce undue fatigue. Additional ly, the
warm-up should be planned so that the activities contribute both to
the goal of the upcoming session and to the development of the
athlete in the medium and long term.
Optimal flexibi lity for performance varies from sport to sport and
is closely related to the types of movements and actions an athlete
will be required to perform. The concept of mobility may be more
appropriate than flexibi lity with its focus on active movement
through the required ROM. For athletes who need to increase
flexibi lity, static and PNF stretching techniques can facilitate an
effective increase in ROM, and these techniques should be a key
component of an extende d training program. Strength and
condi tioning professionals should consider each athlete’ s unique
combination of joint structur e, age, sex, and sport requirements
when r ecommending str etching pr otocols.
STATIC STRETCHING TECHNIQUES
NECK
  1  Look Right and Left   383
  2  Flexion and Extension   383
SHOULDERS AND CHEST
  3  Straight Arms B ehind B ack  384
  4  Seated Lean-B ack  384
894
POSTERIOR OF UPPER ARM
  5  Behind-Neck Str etch (Chick en Wing)   385
UPPER BACK
  6  Cross Arm in Fr ont of Chest   385
  7  Arms Str aight Up Abo ve Head (Pi llar)  386
LOWER BACK
  8  Spinal T wist (Pr etzel)  386
  9  Semi-Leg Str addle   387
10  Cobra Stretch   387
HIPS
11  Forward Lunge (F encer)   388
12  Supine Knee Flex   388
13  Figure Four Str etch   389
TORSO
14  Side B end Wi th Str aight Arms   389
15  Side B end Wi th Bent Arm   390
16  Lunge Wi th Spinal T wist  390
ANTERIOR OF THIGH AND HIP FLEXOR
17  Side Quadriceps Str etch   391
POSTERIOR OF THIGH
18  Sitting T oe Touch   391
19  Semistr addle   392
GROIN
20  Straddle (Spr ead Eagle)   392
21  Butterfly   393
CALF
895
22  Wall Stretch   393
23  Step Str etch   394
Guidelines a nd Precautions for Static
Stretching
Get into a posi tion that f acilitates r elaxation.
Move to the point in the ROM where you experience a sensation of mild
discomf ort. If performing partner -assisted PNF stretching, communicate
clearly wi th your partner .
Hold str etches f or 15 to 30 seconds.
Repeat uni lateral stretches on both sides.
Decrease stretch intensi ty if you experi ence pain, radiating symptoms, or loss
of sensation.
Use caution when str etching a h ypermobi le joint.
Avoid combination movements that involve the spine (e.g., extension and
lateral flexion).
Stabilizing muscles should be active to protect other joints and prevent
unwanted mo vements.
Neck
  1  LOOK RIGHT AND LEFT
1. Stand or si t with the head and neck upright.
2. Turn the head to the right using a submaximal concentric
muscle action.
3. Turn the head to the left using a submaximal concentric muscle
action.
MUSCLE AFFECTED
sternocleidomastoid
896
  2  FLEXION AND EXTENSION
1. Standing or sitting with head and neck upright, flex the neck by
tucking the chin tow ard the chest.
2. If the chin touches the chest, try to touch the chin lower on the
chest.
3. Extend the neck by trying to come as close as possible to
touching the head to the back.
MUSCLES AFFECTED
sternocleidomastoid, suboccipitals, splenae
897
Shoulders and Chest
  3  STRAIGHT ARMS BEHIND BACK
1. Standing, place both arms behind the back.
2. Interlock fingers wi th palms f acing each other .
3. Straighten the elbows f ully.
4. Slowly r aise the arms, k eeping the elbows str aight.
5. Keep the head upright and neck r elaxed.
MUSCLES AFFECTED
anterior deltoid, pectoralis major
898
  4  SEATED LEAN-BACK
1. Sitting with the legs straight and arms extended, place palms
on the floor about 12 inches (30 cm) behind the hips.
2. Point the fingers a way from the body (backw ard).
3. Slide the hands backw ard and lean backw ard.
MUSCLES AFFECTED
anterior deltoid, pectoralis major
899
Posterior of Upper Arm
  5  BEHIND-NECK STRETCH (CHICKEN
WING)
1. Standing or sitting, abduct the right shoulder and flex the
elbow .
2. Reach the right hand down tow ard the left scapula.
3. Grasp the right elbow wi th the left hand.
4. Pull the elbow behind the head with the left hand to increase
shoulder abduction.
5. Repeat on the other side.
MUSCLES AFFECTED
triceps brachii, latissimus dorsi
900
Upper Back
  6  CROSS ARM IN FRONT OF CHEST
1. Stand or sit with the left elbow slightly flexed (15-30 degrees)
and the arm across the body (i.e., shoulder in horizontal
adduction).
2. Grasp the upper arm just above the elbow , placing the right
hand on the posterior side of the upper arm.
3. Pull the left arm across the chest (toward the right) with the
right hand.
4. Repeat on the other side.
MUSCLES AFFECTED
posterior deltoid, rhomboids, middle trapezius
901
  7  ARMS STRAIGHT UP ABOVE HEAD
(PILLAR)
1. Stand with the arms in front of the torso, fingers interlocked
with palms f acing out.
2. Slowly str aighten the arms abo ve the head wi th the palms up .
3. Continue to r each upw ard with the hands and arms.
4. While continuing to reach upward, slowly reach slightly
backw ard.
MUSCLE AFFECTED
latissimus dorsi
902
Lower Back
  8  SPINAL TWIST (PRETZEL)
1. Sitting with the legs straight and the upper body nearly vertical,
place the right f oot to the left side of the left knee.
2. Place the back of the left elbow on the right side of the right
knee, which is now flex ed.
3. Place the right palm on the floor 12 to 16 inches (30-41 cm)
behind the hips.
4. Push the right knee to the left with the left elbow while turning
the shoulders and head to the right as far as possible. Try to
look behind the back.
5. Repeat on the other side.
MUSCLES AFFECTED
internal oblique, external oblique, piriformis, erector
spinae
903
  9  SEMI-LEG STRADDLE
1. Sit with knees flexed 30 degrees to 50 degrees; let the legs
totally relax.
2. Point the knees  outward; the sides of the knees may or may not
touch the floor .
3. Lean forward from the waist and reach forward with extended
arms.
Note:  Flexing the knees and relaxing the legs decreases hamstring
involvement and incr eases lower back str etch.
MUSCLE AFFECTED
erector spinae
904
  10  COBRA STRETCH
1. Lie pr one on the floor or mat.
2. Place the hands on the floor in a push-up position just below
the shoulders wi th the elbows flex ed and held close to the body .
3. Keep the legs extended with the top of the toes or feet resting
on the floor .
4. Lift the head and chest while pressing down through the hands
to extend the spine (ar ch the back).
5. Be sure to keep the pelvis and lower body in contact with the
floor while looking forward. The result is only a partial extension
of the elbows unless the athlete is extr emely flexible.
6. Hold the posi tion whi le breathing slowly and deeply .
7. Slowly lower back to the floor to return to the beginning
position.
MUSCLES AFFECTED
rectus abdominis, pectoralis major, iliopsoas, erector
spinae
905
Hips
  11  FORWARD LUNGE (FENCER)
1. Standing, take a long step forward with the left leg and flex the
left knee unti l it is dir ectly o ver the left f oot.
2. Keep the left f oot flat on the floor .
3. Keep the right knee moder ately flex ed.
4. Keep the back foot pointed in the same direction as the front
foot; it is not necessary to ha ve the heel on the floor .
5. Keep the torso upright and rest the hands on the hips or the
front leg (or al low them to hang at the sides).
6. Slowly lower the hips f orward and down ward.
7. Repeat on the other side.
MUSCLES AFFECTED
iliopsoas, rectus femoris
906
  12  SUPINE KNEE FLEX
1. Lie on the back wi th legs str aight.
2. Flex the right knee and hip , bringing the thigh tow ard the chest.
3. Place both hands behind the thigh and continue to pull the
thigh tow ard the chest.
4. Repeat on the other side.
MUSCLES AFFECTED
hip extensors (gluteus maximus and hamstrings)
907
  13  FIGURE FOUR STRETCH
1. Lie supine on the floor .
2. Flex and external ly rotate the left hip to cross the left ankle over
the right thigh.
3. Flex the right hip and pull it toward the chest until a
comfortable str etch is f elt.
4. Hold and then r elease.
5. Repeat on the other side.
MUSCLES AFFECTED
gluteus medius, piriformis
908
Torso
  14  SIDE BEND WITH STRAIGHT ARMS
1. Stand wi th feet shoulder -width apart.
2. Interlace the fingers with the palms away from the torso and
facing outw ard.
3. Reach upw ard with straight arms.
4. Keeping the arms straight, lean from the waist to the left side.
Do not flex the knees.
5. Repeat on the other side.
MUSCLES AFFECTED
external oblique, latissimus dorsi, serratus anterior
909
  15  SIDE BEND WITH BENT ARM
1. Stand wi th feet shoulder -width apart.
2. Flex the right elbow and r aise the elbow abo ve the head.
3. Reach the right hand down tow ard the left shoulder .
4. Grasp the right elbow wi th the left hand.
5. Pull the elbow behind the head.
6. Keeping the elbow flexed, lean from the waist to the left side.
Do not flex the knees.
7. Repeat on the other side.
MUSCLES AFFECTED
910
external oblique, latissimus dorsi, serratus anterior, triceps
brachii
  16  LUNGE WITH SPINAL TWIST
1. Assume a lunge posi tion wi th the right leg f orward.
2. Place the left hand on the floor dir ectly par allel to the right f oot.
3. Rotate the body, extending the right arm toward the ceiling,
and hold.
4. Repeat on the other side.
MUSCLES AFFECTED
erector spinae, semispinalis, hamstrings, gluteus maximus,
iliopsoas, quadriceps, obliques, pectoralis major, anterior
deltoids
911
Anterior of Thigh and Hip Flexor
  17  SIDE QUADRICEPS STRETCH
1. Lie on the right side wi th both legs str aight.
2. Place the right forearm flat on the floor and the upper arm
perpendicular to the floor .
3. Place the left f orearm at a 45-degr ee angle to the torso .
4. Flex the left leg (knee), with the heel of the left foot moving
toward the but tocks.
5. Grasp the front of the ankle with the left hand and pull toward
the but tocks.
6. Repeat on the other side.
Note:  The stretch occurs as a result of knee flexion and hip
extension.
MUSCLES AFFECTED
quadriceps, iliopsoas
912
Posterior of Thigh
  18  SITTING TOE TOUCH
1. Sit with the upper body nearly v ertical and legs str aight.
2. Lean forward using hip flexion and grasp the toes with each
hand. Slightly pull the toes toward the upper body and pull the
chest toward the legs. If you have limited flexibi lity, try to grasp
the ankles.
MUSCLES AFFECTED
hamstrings, erector spinae, gastrocnemius
913
  19  SEMISTRADDLE
1. Sit with the upper body nearly v ertical and legs str aight.
2. Place the sole of the right foot on the inner side of the left
knee. The outer side of the right leg should be resting on the
floor.
3. Lean forward using hip flexion and grasp the toes of the left
foot with the left hand. Slightly pull the toes toward the upper
body as the chest is also pul led tow ard the left leg.
4. Repeat on the other side.
MUSCLES AFFECTED
gastrocnemius, hamstrings, erector spinae
Groin
  20  STRADDLE (SPREAD EAGLE)
1. Sit with the upper body nearly vertical and legs straight. Abduct
the hips, spr eading the legs as f ar as possible.
2. With both hands, grasp the toes of the left foot and pull on the
toes sl ightly whi le pul ling the chest tow ard the left leg.
914
3. Repeat toward the center by grasping the right toes with the
right hand and the left toes with the left hand. Pull the torso
forward and tow ard the floor .
MUSCLES AFFECTED
gastrocnemius, hamstrings, erector spinae, hip adductors,
sartorius
  21  BUTTERFLY
1. Sitting with the upper body nearly vertical and legs straight, flex
both knees, bringing the soles of the f eet together .
2. Pull the f eet tow ard the body .
3. Place the hands on the f eet and the elbows on the legs.
4. Pull the torso slightly forward as the elbows push down, causing
hip abduction.
915
MUSCLES AFFECTED
hip adductors, sartorius
Calf
  22  WALL STRETCH
1. Stand facing the wall with feet shoulder -width apart and toes
approximately 2 f eet (0.6 m) f rom the w all.
2. Lean f orward, placing the hands on the w all.
3. Step back approximately 2 feet (0.6 m) with the stretch leg
while flexing the opposi te knee.
4. Extend the knee of the stretch leg and lower the heel to the
floor to apply the str etch.
5. Repeat on the other side.
MUSCLES AFFECTED
gastrocnemius, soleus, Achilles tendon
916
  23  STEP STRETCH
1. Place the ball of one foot on the edge of a step or board 3 to 4
inches (8-10 cm) high, wi th the other f oot flat on the step .
2. With straight legs, lower the heel of the foot on the edge of the
step as f ar as possible.
3. Repeat on the other side.
Note:  To stretch the Achilles tendon , complete the same stretch with
10 degr ees of knee flexion.
MUSCLES AFFECTED
gastrocnemius, soleus, Achilles tendon
917
DYNAMIC STRETCHING
TECHNIQUES
  24  Arm S wings   396
  25  Glute B ridge   396
  26  Inchworm   397
  27  Quadruped R each and R otate   397
  28  Lunge W alk  398
  29  Lateral Lunge   398
  30  Lunge W alk Wi th Front Leg Extension   399
  31  Speed Skater Lunge   399
918
  32  Lunge Wi th Ov erhead Side R each   400
  33  Walking Knee Li ft  400
  34  Forward Lunge Wi th Elbow to I nstep   401
  35  Heel-to- Toe Walk  402
  36  Walking Ov er and Under   403
  37  Inverted Hamstring Str etch   404
  38  Straight-Leg Mar ch  405
  39  Bear Cr awl  406
  40  Spiderman Cr awl  406
Guidelines a nd Precautions for Dynamic
Stretching
Carry out 5 to 10 repetitions for each movement, either in place or over a
given distance.
Where possible, pr ogressively incr ease the ROM on each r epetition.
Where appropriate,  increase the speed of motion in subsequent sets, but
always maintain contr ol of the motion.
Actively contr ol muscular actions as y ou mo ve through the ROM.
Where appropriate, try to replicate the movements required for sport
performance.
Move progressively thr ough the ROM.
Move deliberately through the motion but without bouncing (movement
should be contr olled at al l times).
Do not f orsak e good technique f or addi tional ROM.
24  ARM SWINGS
1. Stand erect and raise the arms in front of the body until they
are parallel to the floor .
2. While walking over a prescribed distance, swing the arms in
unison to the right so the left arm is in front of the chest, the
fingers of the left hand are pointing directly lateral to the left
shoulder , and the right arm is behind the body .
919
3. Immediately reverse the direction of movement to swing the
arms in unison to the left.
4. Movement should occur only at the shoulder joints (i.e., keep
torso and head f acing f orward).
5. Alternate swinging the arms in unison to the right and left.
MUSCLES AFFECTED
latissimus dorsi, teres major, anterior and posterior
deltoids, pectoralis major
COMMON ERROR
Losing postural integrity as the arms swing
  25  GLUTE BRIDGE
920
1. Lie supine with the knees flexed to approximately 90 degrees
and the f eet hip- width apart and flat on the floor .
2. Pushing the feet into the floor and squeezing the glutes, lift the
hips up toward the ceiling until the body attains a straight-line
postur e.
3. Hold f or a second and then r eturn the hips to the floor .
4. The action can use a single leg as an alternativ e to a double
leg.
MUSCLES AFFECTED
gluteus maximus, hamstrings, erector spinae
COMMON ERROR
Using an excessive range of motion and hyperextending
the lower back
  26  INCHWORM
1. Stand er ect wi th the f eet placed shoulder -width apart.
2. While slightly flexing the knees, flex forward at the waist and
place hands shoulder -width apart flat on the floor .
3. The weight of the body should be shifted back (i.e., not directly
over the hands), with the buttocks high in the air—imagine
making an in verted V wi th the body .
4. Move the hands alternately forward, as if taking short steps
with the hands, unti l the body is in a push-up posi tion.
921
5. Walk the legs to the hands using small steps while keeping the
knees sl ightly flex ed.
6. Repeat the motion o ver a pr escribed distance.
MUSCLES AFFECTED
erector spinae, gastrocnemius, gluteus maximus,
hamstrings, soleus, anterior tibialis
COMMON ERRORS
Rushing the exercise
Failing to maintain postural integrity through the
movement
  27  QUADRUPED REACH AND ROTATE
1. Assume a quadruped posi tion.
2. Raise the left hand and extend the hand under the body,
reaching as f ar to the right as possible.
3. Reverse the action, pulling the left hand back to the beginning
position before pulling the arm back and turning the body away
from the support arm.
4. Keep the lumbar spine in a neutral position so that the action
occurs mainly in the thor acic spine.
5. Carry out the action in a slow and contr olled manner .
6. Repeat on the other side.
922
MUSCLES AFFECTED
obliques, erector spinae, rectus abdominis, levator
scapulae, subscapularis, rhomboids, serratus anterior,
subclavius, pectoralis major, pectoralis minor, latissimus
dorsi, medial deltoid
COMMON ERROR
Losing lumbar alignment to gain more range of motion
  28  LUNGE WALK
1. Stand erect with the feet parallel to each other and shoulder -
width apart.
2. Take an exagger ated step directly forward with the left leg,
planting the left f oot flat on the floor pointing str aight ahead.
3. Allow the left hip and knee to slowly flex, keeping the left knee
directly o ver the left f oot.
4. Slightly flex the right knee and lower it until it is 1 to 2 inches
(3-5 cm) above the floor; the right foot should be pointed
straight ahead.
923
5. Balance the weight evenly between the ball of the right foot
and the entir e left f oot.
6. Keep the torso perpendicular  to the floor by sitting back on the
right leg.
7. Forcefully push off of the floor by extending the left hip and
knee.
8. Pick up the right foot and place it next to the left foot; do not
stutter-step f orward.
9. Stand erect, pause, and then step forward with the right leg,
progressing f orward with each step .
MUSCLES AFFECTED
gluteus maximus, hamstrings, iliopsoas, quadriceps
COMMON ERROR
Not achieving the required position at the ankle, knee, hip,
and torso
  29  LATERAL LUNGE
1. Stand wi th the f eet hip- width apart and f eet facing f orward.
924
2. Take a relatively large lateral step with the right foot while
keeping the left f oot in contact wi th the floor .
3. Hinge at the hips, pushing the hips back, and flex the left hip
and knee, lowering the body toward the ground until the left
hip and knee are at approximately 90 degrees. The right knee
remains f ully extended as the left knee and hip flex.
4. Keep the body aligned within the base of support, and do not
lean f orward.
5. Return to the beginning position and then either repeat for the
desired numbe r of repetitions on the same leg or alternat e legs
for the desir ed number of r epetitions.
MUSCLES AFFECTED
quadriceps, hip adductors, hip abductors, gluteus
maximus, gluteus medius
COMMON ERRORS
Taking a step that is too small or too long
Losing the feet alignment
Not maintaining postural alignment
925
  30  LUNGE WALK WITH FRONT LEG
EXTENSION
1. Take an exagger ated step directly forward with the right leg and
assume a lunge stance, keeping the right knee directly over the
right foot and the rear (left) knee about an inch or so off the
floor ( note: this pr eparatory posi tion is not shown).
2. Flex the torso forward with the hands reaching toward the right
foot. From this position, lift the hips up and back, extending the
right knee to a fully (or nearly so) extended position. This will
cause the left knee to extend  as well and result in a stretch of
the hamstring muscles.
3. After the stretch is held, extend the torso to an erect position,
step the r ear (left) f oot forward, and r epeat on the other side.
MUSCLES AFFECTED
hamstrings, gluteus maximus, iliopsoas, quadriceps
COMMON ERROR
Losing postural integrity during the movement
  31  SPEED SKATER LUNGE
926
1. Assume an upright stance with feet hip-width apart and arms to
the side ( note: this pr eparatory posi tion is not shown).
2. Shift the body weight to the left foot and at the same time drop
the hips back and down, reaching the right leg behind the body
and as far as possible to the opposi te (right) side. The result is
a fully extended rear (right) knee and a contralater al (opposi te)
lateral reach of the other (left) arm.
3. Push back to the beginning position and repeat on the other
side.
4. For a more advanced exercise, the movement can be initiated
by a later al hop .
MUSCLES AFFECTED
quadriceps, gluteus maximus, gluteus medius, hip
adductors, hamstrings
COMMON ERRORS
Taking a step that is too small or too long
Losing postural integrity during the movement
927
  32  LUNGE WITH OVERHEAD SIDE
REACH
1. Stand erect with the feet parallel to each other and shoulder -
width apart.
2. Take an exagger ated step directly forward with the left leg,
planting the left f oot flat on the floor pointing str aight ahead.
3. Allow the left hip and knee to slowly flex, keeping the left knee
directly o ver the left f oot.
4. Slightly flex the right knee and lower it until it is 1 to 2 inches
(3-5 cm) above the floor; the right foot should be pointed
straight ahead.
5. Reach up high with the right arm and bend the torso laterally
toward the left leg.
6. Return to an erect torso position, and then forcefully push off
the floor b y extending the left hip and knee.
7. Pick up the right foot and place it next to the left foot; do not
stutter-step f orward.
8. Stand erect, pause, and then step forward with the right leg,
progressing f orward with each step .
MUSCLES AFFECTED
gluteus maximus, hamstrings, iliopsoas, latissimus dorsi,
internal and external oblique, rectus femoris
COMMON ERROR
Reaching too early before the lunge position has been
attained
928
  33  WALKING KNEE LIFT
1. Stand erect with the feet parallel to each other and shoulder -
width apart.
2. Step forward with the left leg and flex the right hip and knee to
move the right thigh upw ard tow ard the chest.
3. Grasp the front of the right knee or upper shin and use the
arms to pull the right knee up further and to squeez e the thigh
against the chest.
4. Dorsiflex the left f oot as the right hip and knee ar e flex ed.
5. Keeping the torso erect, pause for a moment, then proceed to
step down wi th the right leg.
6. Shift the body weight to the right leg and repeat the motion
with the left leg.
7. Progress forward with each step, increasing the ROM and speed
on subsequent steps.
929
MUSCLES AFFECTED
gluteus maximus, iliopsoas, quadriceps, hamstrings
COMMON ERROR
Leaning the torso backward to achieve ROM
  34  FORWARD LUNGE WITH ELBOW TO
INSTEP
1. Stand erect with the feet parallel to each other and shoulder -
width apart.
2. Take an exagger ated step directly forward with the left leg,
planting the left f oot flat on the floor pointing str aight ahead.
3. Allow the left hip and knee to slowly flex, keeping the left knee
directly o ver the left f oot.
930
4. Slightly flex the right knee and lower it until it is 1 to 2 inches
(3-5 cm) above the floor; the right foot should be pointed
straight ahead.
5. Lean forward, bringing the left arm forward and touching the
left elbow to the instep of the left foot; the right hand may be
placed on the floor to maintain balance.
6. Lean back to return to an erect torso position, and then
forcefully push of f the floor b y extending the left hip and knee.
7. Pick up the right foot and place it next to the left foot; do not
stutter-step f orward.
8. Stand erect, pause, and then step forward with the right leg,
progressing f orward with each step .
MUSCLES AFFECTED
biceps femoris, erector spinae, gastrocnemius, gluteus
maximus, hamstrings, iliopsoas, latissimus dorsi, internal
and external oblique, quadriceps, soleus
COMMON ERROR
Losing postural integrity in an attempt to achieve greater
ROM
931
  35  HEEL-TO-TOE WALK
1. Stand erect with the feet parallel to each other and shoulder -
width apart.
2. Take a small step forward with the right leg; place the heel of
the right foot on the ground first and then continue to dorsiflex
the foot.
3. Immediately roll forward and rise up as high as possible  onto
the bal l of the right f oot.
4. Swing the left leg f orward in or der to tak e another smal l step .
5. Repeat wi th the left leg, pr ogressing f orward with each step .
MUSCLES AFFECTED
gastrocnemius, soleus, anterior tibialis
COMMON ERROR
932
Failing to maintain a vertical posture and losing balance
36  WALKING OVER AND UNDER
1. Stand erect with the feet parallel to each other and shoulder -
width apart.
2. Flex the left hip and knee, and then abduct the left thigh until it
is par allel to the floor .
3. Step later ally to the left, stepping later ally over the first hur dle.
4. Place the left foot firmly on the ground, shift the body weight to
the left leg, and then proceed to lift the right leg over the first
hurdle.
5. After lifting the right leg over the hurdle and placing the right
foot firmly on the ground, stand erect, pause, and then flex the
hips and knees and dorsiflex the ankles to assume a full squat
position.
6. Extend the left leg later ally, as if perf orming a later al lunge.
7. Keeping the body weight low, move the body laterally, ducking
under the second hur dle.
933
8. Stand erect, pause, and repeat the motion in the opposi te
direction, ducking under the second hurdle and stepping over
the first.
Note:  If hurdles are not available, athletes can perform the exercise
by mirroring the motion of trying to step laterally and then under a
hurdle.
MUSCLES AFFECTED
hip abductors, hip adductors, gastrocnemius, gluteus
maximus, hamstrings, iliopsoas, rectus femoris, soleus
COMMON ERRORS
Leaning the torso backward to achieve ROM in the over
section
Flexing the torso forward rather than squatting to
achieve ROM in the under section
934
  37  INVERTED HAMSTRING STRETCH
1. Stand tal l and tak e a smal l step f orward with the left leg.
2. Flex at the w aist.
3. Reach forward with the left arm and simultaneously reach back
with the right leg.
4. Try to k eep the hips squar e.
5. Reach a position in which you feel a stretch in the hamstrings
but eventual ly aim to attain a position in which the body is
parallel to the floor .
6. Reach the right hand down tow ard the floor .
935
7. Return to the start by actively using the hamstrings and gluteals
of the planted leg.
8. Take a step f orward and r epeat on the other side.
MUSCLES AFFECTED
gluteus maximus, hamstrings, hip abductors, hip
adductors, erector spinae
COMMON ERROR
Performing the exercise too quickly and losing postural
integrity
936
  38  STRAIGHT-LEG MARCH
1. Assume a tall standing position with both arms outstr etched in
front of the chest.
2. Rise up onto the toes of the left leg and simultaneously , using a
straight-leg action, raise the right leg forward and up, aiming to
actively mo ve it through as lar ge a ROM as possible.
3. Once the highest point is reached, actively pull the leg back to
the beginning posi tion.
937
4. Maintain the tal l standing postur e throughout.
5. Repeat on al ternate legs whi le mo ving f orward.
MUSCLES AFFECTED
gluteus maximus, hamstrings, iliopsoas, rectus femoris
COMMON ERROR
Using excessive momentum to increase the ROM
  39  BEAR CRAWL
1. Assume a push-up posi tion.
2. Reach forward with the right arm and the left leg, moving the
body f orward in a cr awling motion.
3. Reach f orward with the opposi te leg and hand combination.
4. Keep the knees 1 to 2 inches (3-5 cm) of f the gr ound.
5. Repeat in a rhythmic manner for the desired distance or
repetitions.
938
6. As competency increases, the ROM can increase. Additional ly,
the cr awl can be perf ormed backw ard.
MUSCLES AFFECTED
erector spinae, gastrocnemius, gluteus maximus, deltoids,
iliopsoas, latissimus dorsi, internal and external oblique,
quadriceps
COMMON ERRORS
Positioning the hips too high
Moving the back out of a neutral position
  40  SPIDERMAN CRAWL
1. Assume a push-up position but with elbows flexed so that the
position is lower than normal.
2. Lift and external ly rotate the left leg, bringing the knee forward
at an angle outside the left elbow .
3. Walk the hands f orward and acr oss the body .
4. As this progresses, bring the right leg forward outside the right
hand and r epeat f or the giv en distance.
5. Repeat, al ternating sides, f or the r equired distance.
MUSCLES AFFECTED
939
biceps femoris, erector spinae, gastrocnemius, gluteus
maximus, hamstrings, iliopsoas, latissimus dorsi, internal
and external oblique, quadriceps, soleus
COMMON ERRORS
Positioning the hips too high
Moving the back out of a neutral position
PNF STRETCHING TECHNIQUES
  41  Calves  408
  42  Chest   408
  43  Groin  408
  44  Quadriceps and Hip Flex ors  409
  45  Shoulders   409
Guidelines a nd Precautions for PNF
Stretching
Decide on the muscle to be stretched, the ROM needed for the activity, and
whether PNF methods ar e best sui ted.
Decide on the stretch to be performed and the type of PNF stretching best
suited to the si tuation.
Communicate clearly wi th your partner bef ore and thr oughout the str etch.
Contr action dur ations should be of a moder ate intensi ty.
Contr actions ar e typical ly sustained f or 6 to 10 seconds.
Passive stretch dur ations ar e typical ly 30 seconds.
940
Rest periods of 30 seconds are recommended between repetitions, and 2 to 4
repetitions ar e recommended per str etch.
Ensur e a thor ough w arm-up is perf ormed prior to PNF str etching.
Use moderate contraction intensi ties rather than high intensi ties, especial ly if
stretching smal ler joints.
Progress the ROM gr adual ly during the pr otocols.
Effective communic ation with your partner is essential to ensur e the exercise
is perf ormed saf ely.
Take special car e if stretching smal ler joints such as the shoulders.
  41  CALVES
  42  CHEST
941
  43  GROIN
  44  QUADRICEPS AND HIP FLEXORS
942
  45  SHOULDERS
KEY TERMS
active stretch
agonist contr action
autogenic inhibi tion
ball-and-sock et joint
ballistic str etch
943
central nerv ous system (CNS) pr eparatory ex ercise
contract-relax
dynamic flexibi lity
dynamic str etch
elastici ty
ellipsoidal joint
fibrosis
flexibi lity
gener al warm-up
Golgi tendon or gan (GT O)
hinge joint
hold-r elax
hold-r elax wi th agonist contr action
mobility
mobility drills
muscle spindles
musculotendinous uni t (MTU)
passiv e stretch
plastici ty
postactiv ation perf ormance enhancement (P APE)
potentiation
proprioceptiv e neur omuscular f acilitation (PNF)
raise, activ ate and mobi lize, and potentiate (RAMP)
range of motion (ROM)
reciprocal inhibi tion
specific warm-up
static flexibi lity
static str etch
stretch r eflex
STUDY QUESTIONS
  1.  Which of the following is not a temper ature-related effect of a
warm-up?
  a.  an incr ease in cor e body temper ature
944
  b.  the disruption of tr ansient connectiv e tissue bonds
  c.  incr eased blood flow to working muscles
  d.  enhanced neur al function
  2.  How does the activate and mobilize phase of the RAMP
protocol di ffer from tr aditional static str etching?
  a.  It emphasiz es holding posi tions to lengthen muscles and
improve flexibi lity.
  b.  It focuses on dev eloping mobi lity through dynamic
movements that bui ld mo vement competency .
  c.  It el iminates mo vement pat terns in f avor of isolated joint
stretches.
  d.  It is only used f or recovery sessions and not bef ore
performance.
  3.  Which of the following statements best reflects advice  for CNS
stimulation?
  a.  The impact of CNS stimulation is highly individual and
should be consider ed on a cost -benefi t basis.
  b.  Stimulation wi ll always require the use of r esistance
training ex ercises.
  c.  Stimulation can only be el icited thr ough the appl ication of
high r esistances.
  d.  B eginners ar e likely to benefi t to a gr eater degr ee than
highly tr ained athletes.
  4.  Which of the following is a potential reason for an increase in
ROM ac cording to the sensory theory?
  a.  autogenic inhibi tion
  b.  incr eases in str etch toler ance
  c.  a change in the mechanical pr operties of the
musculotendinous uni t
  d.  a change in muscle ar chitectur e
  5.  Which of the following statements about static stretching is
supported b y curr ent resear ch evidence?
945
  a.  Total str etch time ac cumulated thr oughout the da y may be
as important as individual str etch dur ation.
  b.  The dur ation of a single str etch is mor e important than
how often str etching is perf ormed.
  c.  Str etching f or a maximum of 10 seconds pr oduces
superior r esults than str etching f or 30 seconds.
  d.  Str etching should be done to the point of pain to incr ease
range of motion.
946