# Section 15.3

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 15: Performance Preparation, Mobility, and Flexibility

**Section:** 15.3 -- Flexibility Training

**PDF Pages:** 891--920

FIGURE 15.11  Concentric contraction of quadriceps during hold-r elax with agonist
contraction PNF hamstring str etch, cr eating incr eased ROM during passiv e stretch.
891
Programming Considerations for
Stretching
As with all forms of training, frequency , duration, and intensi ty are
important issues in program design (26). Both static and
precontr action stretching have been shown to increase joint
flexibi lity around the knee, hip, trunk, shoulder , and ankle joints (56,
89), although doubt remains as to which protocols elicit the greatest
effects (56). This is further compl icated by the fact that the exact
mechanisms responsible for increased flexibi lity are still unclear . The
acute effects of stretching on ROM are transient and are greatest
immediately after the stretching session; then they decline, with the
duration of significant improvements in flexibi lity ranging from 3
minutes (27) to 24 hours (29).
For longer-lasting effects, a dedicated flexibi lity program is
required (89), and improvements in flexibi lity have been shown with
short-term interv entions ranging from two to eight weeks (38),
Interestingly , time stretching  per week seems to have a greater
impact than time spent stretching within a single session, suggesting
that frequency rather than duration may be a more important factor
(90). It is important to note that PNF stretching may be an exception
to this, where a single session per week may be optim al (66). In
terms of intensi ty of stretching, higher intensi ties do not appear to
have any additional benefi t over less intense methods (54). Howev er,
it is not clear whether this applies when extreme flexibi lity is needed
(54).
As to the appropriate duration for a static stretch, 15 to 30
seconds is gener ally recommended (81) and has been shown to be
more effective than shorter durations (66). Evidence supports the
use of 30 seconds (4-6) and suggests diminishing returns beyond
this duration. Another consider ation is that the total stretch time
throughout a day may be as important as the duration of a single
stretch (17), further emphasizing the potential importance of
892
frequency as a key factor in program design. When performing static
stretches, athletes should hold the stretch at a position of mild
discomf ort (not pain); joint integri ty should never be compr omised
to increase ROM. All stretching sessions should be preceded by a
period of gener al activity to raise muscle temper ature. Because
neural and vascular struct ures are stretched during  flexibi lity
exercises, athletes should be monitored for a loss of sensation or
radiating pain.
As a gener al guidel ine, stretching at the following times can
provide optimal benefi ts:
Following practice and competi tion. Postpractice stretching
potential ly facilitates ROM improvements (40), although the
evidence for this is mixed (79). It should be performed within
5 to 10 minutes after practice. The increased body
temper ature increases the elastic properties of collagen within
muscles and tendons, which potential ly allows for a greater
stretch magni tude. Postpractice stretching may also decrease
muscle soreness, although the evidence on this is again
ambiguous (59, 79).
As a separ ate session . If increased  levels of flexibi lity are
required, additional stretching sessions may be needed. In this
case, stretching should be preceded by a thorough gener al
warm-up to allow for the increase in muscle temper ature
necessary for effective stretching. This type of session can be
especial ly useful as a recovery session on the day after a
competi tion.
893
Conclusion
A warm-up can provide benefi ts that enhance subsequent
performance. Warm-up should be geared toward the particular sport
or activity and should use an appropriate structur e, ensuring that an
athlete is optimal ly prepared for subsequent activity. Effective warm-
up planning can ensur e that the activities prepare the athlete for the
upcoming session but do not induce undue fatigue. Additional ly, the
warm-up should be planned so that the activities contribute both to
the goal of the upcoming session and to the development of the
athlete in the medium and long term.
Optimal flexibi lity for performance varies from sport to sport and
is closely related to the types of movements and actions an athlete
will be required to perform. The concept of mobility may be more
appropriate than flexibi lity with its focus on active movement
through the required ROM. For athletes who need to increase
flexibi lity, static and PNF stretching techniques can facilitate an
effective increase in ROM, and these techniques should be a key
component of an extende d training program. Strength and
condi tioning professionals should consider each athlete’ s unique
combination of joint structur e, age, sex, and sport requirements
when r ecommending str etching pr otocols.
STATIC STRETCHING TECHNIQUES
NECK
  1  Look Right and Left   383
  2  Flexion and Extension   383
SHOULDERS AND CHEST
  3  Straight Arms B ehind B ack  384
  4  Seated Lean-B ack  384
894
POSTERIOR OF UPPER ARM
  5  Behind-Neck Str etch (Chick en Wing)   385
UPPER BACK
  6  Cross Arm in Fr ont of Chest   385
  7  Arms Str aight Up Abo ve Head (Pi llar)  386
LOWER BACK
  8  Spinal T wist (Pr etzel)  386
  9  Semi-Leg Str addle   387
10  Cobra Stretch   387
HIPS
11  Forward Lunge (F encer)   388
12  Supine Knee Flex   388
13  Figure Four Str etch   389
TORSO
14  Side B end Wi th Str aight Arms   389
15  Side B end Wi th Bent Arm   390
16  Lunge Wi th Spinal T wist  390
ANTERIOR OF THIGH AND HIP FLEXOR
17  Side Quadriceps Str etch   391
POSTERIOR OF THIGH
18  Sitting T oe Touch   391
19  Semistr addle   392
GROIN
20  Straddle (Spr ead Eagle)   392
21  Butterfly   393
CALF
895
22  Wall Stretch   393
23  Step Str etch   394
Guidelines a nd Precautions for Static
Stretching
Get into a posi tion that f acilitates r elaxation.
Move to the point in the ROM where you experience a sensation of mild
discomf ort. If performing partner -assisted PNF stretching, communicate
clearly wi th your partner .
Hold str etches f or 15 to 30 seconds.
Repeat uni lateral stretches on both sides.
Decrease stretch intensi ty if you experi ence pain, radiating symptoms, or loss
of sensation.
Use caution when str etching a h ypermobi le joint.
Avoid combination movements that involve the spine (e.g., extension and
lateral flexion).
Stabilizing muscles should be active to protect other joints and prevent
unwanted mo vements.
Neck
  1  LOOK RIGHT AND LEFT
1. Stand or si t with the head and neck upright.
2. Turn the head to the right using a submaximal concentric
muscle action.
3. Turn the head to the left using a submaximal concentric muscle
action.
MUSCLE AFFECTED
sternocleidomastoid
896
  2  FLEXION AND EXTENSION
1. Standing or sitting with head and neck upright, flex the neck by
tucking the chin tow ard the chest.
2. If the chin touches the chest, try to touch the chin lower on the
chest.
3. Extend the neck by trying to come as close as possible to
touching the head to the back.
MUSCLES AFFECTED
sternocleidomastoid, suboccipitals, splenae
897
Shoulders and Chest
  3  STRAIGHT ARMS BEHIND BACK
1. Standing, place both arms behind the back.
2. Interlock fingers wi th palms f acing each other .
3. Straighten the elbows f ully.
4. Slowly r aise the arms, k eeping the elbows str aight.
5. Keep the head upright and neck r elaxed.
MUSCLES AFFECTED
anterior deltoid, pectoralis major
898
  4  SEATED LEAN-BACK
1. Sitting with the legs straight and arms extended, place palms
on the floor about 12 inches (30 cm) behind the hips.
2. Point the fingers a way from the body (backw ard).
3. Slide the hands backw ard and lean backw ard.
MUSCLES AFFECTED
anterior deltoid, pectoralis major
899
Posterior of Upper Arm
  5  BEHIND-NECK STRETCH (CHICKEN
WING)
1. Standing or sitting, abduct the right shoulder and flex the
elbow .
2. Reach the right hand down tow ard the left scapula.
3. Grasp the right elbow wi th the left hand.
4. Pull the elbow behind the head with the left hand to increase
shoulder abduction.
5. Repeat on the other side.
MUSCLES AFFECTED
triceps brachii, latissimus dorsi
900
Upper Back
  6  CROSS ARM IN FRONT OF CHEST
1. Stand or sit with the left elbow slightly flexed (15-30 degrees)
and the arm across the body (i.e., shoulder in horizontal
adduction).
2. Grasp the upper arm just above the elbow , placing the right
hand on the posterior side of the upper arm.
3. Pull the left arm across the chest (toward the right) with the
right hand.
4. Repeat on the other side.
MUSCLES AFFECTED
posterior deltoid, rhomboids, middle trapezius
901
  7  ARMS STRAIGHT UP ABOVE HEAD
(PILLAR)
1. Stand with the arms in front of the torso, fingers interlocked
with palms f acing out.
2. Slowly str aighten the arms abo ve the head wi th the palms up .
3. Continue to r each upw ard with the hands and arms.
4. While continuing to reach upward, slowly reach slightly
backw ard.
MUSCLE AFFECTED
latissimus dorsi
902
Lower Back
  8  SPINAL TWIST (PRETZEL)
1. Sitting with the legs straight and the upper body nearly vertical,
place the right f oot to the left side of the left knee.
2. Place the back of the left elbow on the right side of the right
knee, which is now flex ed.
3. Place the right palm on the floor 12 to 16 inches (30-41 cm)
behind the hips.
4. Push the right knee to the left with the left elbow while turning
the shoulders and head to the right as far as possible. Try to
look behind the back.
5. Repeat on the other side.
MUSCLES AFFECTED
internal oblique, external oblique, piriformis, erector
spinae
903
  9  SEMI-LEG STRADDLE
1. Sit with knees flexed 30 degrees to 50 degrees; let the legs
totally relax.
2. Point the knees  outward; the sides of the knees may or may not
touch the floor .
3. Lean forward from the waist and reach forward with extended
arms.
Note:  Flexing the knees and relaxing the legs decreases hamstring
involvement and incr eases lower back str etch.
MUSCLE AFFECTED
erector spinae
904
  10  COBRA STRETCH
1. Lie pr one on the floor or mat.
2. Place the hands on the floor in a push-up position just below
the shoulders wi th the elbows flex ed and held close to the body .
3. Keep the legs extended with the top of the toes or feet resting
on the floor .
4. Lift the head and chest while pressing down through the hands
to extend the spine (ar ch the back).
5. Be sure to keep the pelvis and lower body in contact with the
floor while looking forward. The result is only a partial extension
of the elbows unless the athlete is extr emely flexible.
6. Hold the posi tion whi le breathing slowly and deeply .
7. Slowly lower back to the floor to return to the beginning
position.
MUSCLES AFFECTED
rectus abdominis, pectoralis major, iliopsoas, erector
spinae
905
Hips
  11  FORWARD LUNGE (FENCER)
1. Standing, take a long step forward with the left leg and flex the
left knee unti l it is dir ectly o ver the left f oot.
2. Keep the left f oot flat on the floor .
3. Keep the right knee moder ately flex ed.
4. Keep the back foot pointed in the same direction as the front
foot; it is not necessary to ha ve the heel on the floor .
5. Keep the torso upright and rest the hands on the hips or the
front leg (or al low them to hang at the sides).
6. Slowly lower the hips f orward and down ward.
7. Repeat on the other side.
MUSCLES AFFECTED
iliopsoas, rectus femoris
906
  12  SUPINE KNEE FLEX
1. Lie on the back wi th legs str aight.
2. Flex the right knee and hip , bringing the thigh tow ard the chest.
3. Place both hands behind the thigh and continue to pull the
thigh tow ard the chest.
4. Repeat on the other side.
MUSCLES AFFECTED
hip extensors (gluteus maximus and hamstrings)
907
  13  FIGURE FOUR STRETCH
1. Lie supine on the floor .
2. Flex and external ly rotate the left hip to cross the left ankle over
the right thigh.
3. Flex the right hip and pull it toward the chest until a
comfortable str etch is f elt.
4. Hold and then r elease.
5. Repeat on the other side.
MUSCLES AFFECTED
gluteus medius, piriformis
908
Torso
  14  SIDE BEND WITH STRAIGHT ARMS
1. Stand wi th feet shoulder -width apart.
2. Interlace the fingers with the palms away from the torso and
facing outw ard.
3. Reach upw ard with straight arms.
4. Keeping the arms straight, lean from the waist to the left side.
Do not flex the knees.
5. Repeat on the other side.
MUSCLES AFFECTED
external oblique, latissimus dorsi, serratus anterior
909
  15  SIDE BEND WITH BENT ARM
1. Stand wi th feet shoulder -width apart.
2. Flex the right elbow and r aise the elbow abo ve the head.
3. Reach the right hand down tow ard the left shoulder .
4. Grasp the right elbow wi th the left hand.
5. Pull the elbow behind the head.
6. Keeping the elbow flexed, lean from the waist to the left side.
Do not flex the knees.
7. Repeat on the other side.
MUSCLES AFFECTED
910
external oblique, latissimus dorsi, serratus anterior, triceps
brachii
  16  LUNGE WITH SPINAL TWIST
1. Assume a lunge posi tion wi th the right leg f orward.
2. Place the left hand on the floor dir ectly par allel to the right f oot.
3. Rotate the body, extending the right arm toward the ceiling,
and hold.
4. Repeat on the other side.
MUSCLES AFFECTED
erector spinae, semispinalis, hamstrings, gluteus maximus,
iliopsoas, quadriceps, obliques, pectoralis major, anterior
deltoids
911
Anterior of Thigh and Hip Flexor
  17  SIDE QUADRICEPS STRETCH
1. Lie on the right side wi th both legs str aight.
2. Place the right forearm flat on the floor and the upper arm
perpendicular to the floor .
3. Place the left f orearm at a 45-degr ee angle to the torso .
4. Flex the left leg (knee), with the heel of the left foot moving
toward the but tocks.
5. Grasp the front of the ankle with the left hand and pull toward
the but tocks.
6. Repeat on the other side.
Note:  The stretch occurs as a result of knee flexion and hip
extension.
MUSCLES AFFECTED
quadriceps, iliopsoas
912
Posterior of Thigh
  18  SITTING TOE TOUCH
1. Sit with the upper body nearly v ertical and legs str aight.
2. Lean forward using hip flexion and grasp the toes with each
hand. Slightly pull the toes toward the upper body and pull the
chest toward the legs. If you have limited flexibi lity, try to grasp
the ankles.
MUSCLES AFFECTED
hamstrings, erector spinae, gastrocnemius
913
  19  SEMISTRADDLE
1. Sit with the upper body nearly v ertical and legs str aight.
2. Place the sole of the right foot on the inner side of the left
knee. The outer side of the right leg should be resting on the
floor.
3. Lean forward using hip flexion and grasp the toes of the left
foot with the left hand. Slightly pull the toes toward the upper
body as the chest is also pul led tow ard the left leg.
4. Repeat on the other side.
MUSCLES AFFECTED
gastrocnemius, hamstrings, erector spinae
Groin
  20  STRADDLE (SPREAD EAGLE)
1. Sit with the upper body nearly vertical and legs straight. Abduct
the hips, spr eading the legs as f ar as possible.
2. With both hands, grasp the toes of the left foot and pull on the
toes sl ightly whi le pul ling the chest tow ard the left leg.
914
3. Repeat toward the center by grasping the right toes with the
right hand and the left toes with the left hand. Pull the torso
forward and tow ard the floor .
MUSCLES AFFECTED
gastrocnemius, hamstrings, erector spinae, hip adductors,
sartorius
  21  BUTTERFLY
1. Sitting with the upper body nearly vertical and legs straight, flex
both knees, bringing the soles of the f eet together .
2. Pull the f eet tow ard the body .
3. Place the hands on the f eet and the elbows on the legs.
4. Pull the torso slightly forward as the elbows push down, causing
hip abduction.
915
MUSCLES AFFECTED
hip adductors, sartorius
Calf
  22  WALL STRETCH
1. Stand facing the wall with feet shoulder -width apart and toes
approximately 2 f eet (0.6 m) f rom the w all.
2. Lean f orward, placing the hands on the w all.
3. Step back approximately 2 feet (0.6 m) with the stretch leg
while flexing the opposi te knee.
4. Extend the knee of the stretch leg and lower the heel to the
floor to apply the str etch.
5. Repeat on the other side.
MUSCLES AFFECTED
gastrocnemius, soleus, Achilles tendon
916
  23  STEP STRETCH
1. Place the ball of one foot on the edge of a step or board 3 to 4
inches (8-10 cm) high, wi th the other f oot flat on the step .
2. With straight legs, lower the heel of the foot on the edge of the
step as f ar as possible.
3. Repeat on the other side.
Note:  To stretch the Achilles tendon , complete the same stretch with
10 degr ees of knee flexion.
MUSCLES AFFECTED
gastrocnemius, soleus, Achilles tendon
917
DYNAMIC STRETCHING
TECHNIQUES
  24  Arm S wings   396
  25  Glute B ridge   396
  26  Inchworm   397
  27  Quadruped R each and R otate   397
  28  Lunge W alk  398
  29  Lateral Lunge   398
  30  Lunge W alk Wi th Front Leg Extension   399
  31  Speed Skater Lunge   399
918
  32  Lunge Wi th Ov erhead Side R each   400
  33  Walking Knee Li ft  400
  34  Forward Lunge Wi th Elbow to I nstep   401
  35  Heel-to- Toe Walk  402
  36  Walking Ov er and Under   403
  37  Inverted Hamstring Str etch   404
  38  Straight-Leg Mar ch  405
  39  Bear Cr awl  406
  40  Spiderman Cr awl  406
Guidelines a nd Precautions for Dynamic
Stretching
Carry out 5 to 10 repetitions for each movement, either in place or over a
given distance.
Where possible, pr ogressively incr ease the ROM on each r epetition.
Where appropriate,  increase the speed of motion in subsequent sets, but
always maintain contr ol of the motion.
Actively contr ol muscular actions as y ou mo ve through the ROM.
Where appropriate, try to replicate the movements required for sport
performance.
Move progressively thr ough the ROM.
Move deliberately through the motion but without bouncing (movement
should be contr olled at al l times).
Do not f orsak e good technique f or addi tional ROM.
24  ARM SWINGS
1. Stand erect and raise the arms in front of the body until they
are parallel to the floor .
2. While walking over a prescribed distance, swing the arms in
unison to the right so the left arm is in front of the chest, the
fingers of the left hand are pointing directly lateral to the left
shoulder , and the right arm is behind the body .
919
3. Immediately reverse the direction of movement to swing the
arms in unison to the left.
4. Movement should occur only at the shoulder joints (i.e., keep
torso and head f acing f orward).
5. Alternate swinging the arms in unison to the right and left.
MUSCLES AFFECTED
latissimus dorsi, teres major, anterior and posterior
deltoids, pectoralis major
COMMON ERROR
Losing postural integrity as the arms swing
  25  GLUTE BRIDGE
920