# Chapter 16: Exercise Technique for Free Weight and Machine Training

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

**PDF Pages:** 947--1087

CHAPTER  16
EXERCISE TECHNIQUE FOR
FREE WEIGHT AND MACHINE
TRAINING
Scott Caulfield, MA, Guy Hornsby, PhD, and G.
Gregory Haff, PhD
The authors would like to acknowl edge the significant contributions of Douglas
Berninger , Roger W . Earle, and Thomas R. B aechle to this chapter .
After completing this chapter, you will be able to
understand the gener al techniques in volved in pr operly
performing r esistance tr aining ex ercises;
provide br eathing guidel ines;
determine the appr opriateness of wearing a weight bel t;
provide r ecommendations f or spot ting free weight ex ercises;
teach pr oper r esistance tr aining ex ercise and spot ting
techniques; and
identi fy common err ors and fla ws in technique.
This chapter provides guidel ines and strategies for performing and
teaching safe and effective lifting and spotting techniques. At the
core of safe and effective resistance training is proper exercise
947
execution. Exercises that are performed and spotted correctly
promote injury -free results and do so in a time-ef ficient manner .
The first half of this chapter summariz es the fundamental
techniques involved in properly performing and spotting exercises
and using a weight belt during lifting. The last section provides
checkl ists and photogr aphs depicting proper resistance training
exercise and spotting techni ques. It is assumed that the reader is
familiar with these exercises. Therefore, the techniques  presented
are simply guidel ines that represent the most commonly accepted
method of performing the exercises. No attempt has been made to
describe all variations for properly executing and spotting the
exercises included in this chapter .
948
Fundamentals of Exercise Technique
Several commonal ities are observ ed among resistance training
exercise techniques. Most free weight and machine exercises involve
some sort of handgrip on a bar, dumbbel l, or handle, and absolutely
all exercises require an optimal body or limb position, movement
range and speed, and method of breathing. Additional ly, some
exercises may warrant the use of a weight belt and certain
procedur es for lifting a bar of f the floor .
Handgrips
Two common grips are used in resistance training exercises: (a) the
pronated grip, with palms down and knuckles up, also called the
overhand grip; and (b) the supinated grip, with palms up and
knuckles down , also known as the underhand grip (figure 16.1).
(A variation of either grip is the neutral grip, in which the knuckles
point laterally—as in a handshak e.) Two less common grips are the
alternated grip, in which one hand is in a pronated grip and the
other is in a supinated grip, and the hook grip, which is similar to
the pronated grip except that the thumb is positioned under the
index and middle fingers. The hook grip is typical ly used for
performing exercises that require a stronger grip (power exercises,
e.g., snatch). Note that the thumb is wrapped around the bar in all
of the grips shown; this positioning is called a closed grip. When
the thumb does not wrap around the bar, the grip is called an open
or false grip .
949
FIGURE 16.1 Bar grips: (a) pronated,  (b) supinated,  (c) alternated,  (d) hook (posterior
view), and  (e) false.
Establ ishing the proper grip in an exercise involves placing the
hands at the correct distance from each other (referred to as the
grip width ) and from the center of the bar (i.e., to maintain
balance). The three grip widths (figure 16.2) are common,  wide, and
narrow. For most exercises, the hands are placed approximately
shoulder -width apart. The hand positioning for all exercises should
950
result in a balanced, even bar. Weightl ifting exercises and their
variations use the clean grip or the snatch grip, depending upon
the exercise being performed. Both of these grips are pronated
closed hand positions. The clean grip is slightly wider than shoulder -
width apart, outside of the knees. The snatch grip is a wide grip and
can be determ ined using two types of measur ements: the fist-to-
opposi te-shoulder method and the elbow -to-elbow method (also
known as the scarecrow method); see page 469. Both the clean grip
and the snatch grip are often used with a hook grip (mentioned
previously) to assist in giving the athlete a str onger grip .
FIGURE 16.2  Grip widths.
Stable Body and Limb Positioning
Whether an exercise requires lifting a barbel l or dumbbel l from the
floor or pushing and pulling while one is positioned in or on a
machine, establ ishing a stable position is critical for safety and
optimal performance. A stable position enables the athlete to
maintain proper body alignment during an exercise, which in turn
places an appr opriate str ess on muscles and joints.
Exercises performed while standing typical ly require that the feet
be positioned slightly wider than hip width with the heels and balls
of the feet in contact with the floor. Establ ishing a stable position in
or on machine s sometimes requires adjusting the seat or resistance
arm and f astening bel ts snugly .
Seated or supine  (lying face up) exercises performed on a bench
require a specific postur e. The athlete should position the body to
achiev e a five-point body contact position :
1. Head is placed firmly on the bench or back pad.
951
2. Shoulders and upper back are placed firmly and evenly on the
bench or back pad.
3. Buttocks ar e placed ev enly on the bench or seat.
4. Right f oot is flat on the floor .
5. Left foot is flat on the floor .
Establ ishing and maintaining this five-point body contact position
at the beginning and throughout the movement phases promotes
maximal stabi lity and spinal support (2, 9, 10).
Exercises performed during standing typically require
that the feet be positioned slightly wider than hip width
with the heels and balls of the feet in contact with the
floor. Seated or supine exercises performed on a bench
usually require a five-point body contact position.
Cam-, pulley-, or lever-based  exercise machines that have an axis
of rotation require specific positioning of the athlete’ s body, arms, or
legs for reasons of safety and optimal execution. To align the
primary joint of the body involved in the exercise with the axis of the
machine, it may be necessar y to move the seat; the ankle or arm
roller pad; or the thigh, chest, or back pad. For example, adjust the
ankle roller pad (up or down) and the back pad (forward or
backw ard) to line up the knee joint with the machine axis before
performing the leg (knee) extension ex ercise.
Range of Motion and Speed
When the entire range of motion (ROM)  is covered during an
exercise, the value of the exercise is maximiz ed and flexibi lity is
maintained or improved. Ideally, an exercise’s full ROM should mimic
the full ROM of the involved joint or joints in order for the greatest
improvements to occur, but sometimes this is not possible (the knee
of the trailing leg during a lunge) or recommended (using
interv ertebr al joints during a squat).
952
Repetitions performed in a slow, controlled manner increase the
likelihood that full ROM can be reached. Howev er, when power or
quick-lift exercises (e.g., power clean, push jerk, and snatch) are
performed, an effort should be made to accelerate the bar to a
maximal speed while still maintaining control and proper form
throughout the ex ercise.
Breathing Considerations
The most strenuous movement of a repetition—t ypical ly soon after
the transition from the eccentric phase to the concentric phase—is
referred to as the sticking point . Strength and condi tioning
professionals should typical ly instruct athletes to exhale through the
sticking point and to inhale during the less stressful phase of the
repetition (3, 6, 7). For example, since the sticking point of the
biceps curl exercise occurs about midw ay through the upward
movement phase (concentric elbow flexion), the athlete should
exhale during this portion. Inhalation, then, should occur as the bar
is lowered back to the starting position. This breathing strategy
applies to most r esistance tr aining ex ercises.
Breath holding may be suggested in some situations, howev er. For
experienced resistance-tr ained athletes performing structural
exercises  (those that load the vertebr al column and therefore place
stress on it) with high loads, the Valsalva maneuver  can be
helpful for maintaining proper vertebr al alignment and support. As
explained in chapter 2, the Valsalv a maneuv er involves expiring
against a closed glottis, which, when combined with contracting the
abdomen and rib cage muscles, creates rigid compartme nts of fluid
in the lower torso and air in the upper torso (i.e., the “fluid ball”).
The advantage of the Valsalv a maneuv er is that it increases the
rigidity of the entire torso to aid in supporting the vertebr al column,
which in turn reduces the associated compr essive forces on the disks
during lifting (1, 4, 5, 8). It also helps to establ ish and maintain a
normal lordotic lumbar spine position (also called a neutral spine )
and erect upper torso position, described in the technique checkl ists
953
for certain exercises. Be aware, howev er, that the resulting increase
in intra-abdominal pressure has potential ly detrimental side effects,
such as dizziness, disorientation, excessiv ely high blood  pressure,
and blackouts. This is why the breath-holding phase is—and should
be—qui te transient, only about 1 to 2 seconds (at most). Even a
very well-trained individual should not extend the length of the
breath-holding phase, because blood pressure can quickly rise to
triple r esting lev els (7).
Strength and condi tioning professionals involved in condu cting 1-
repetition maximum (1RM) tests in, for example, the squat, deadl ift,
hip sled, leg press, shoulder press, or power clean need to be aware
of the advantages and disadv antages of coaching athletes in the
Valsalv a maneu ver. While it is obviously important that the vertebr al
column be internal ly supported during these movements for safety
and technique  reasons, it is recommended that an athlete not
extend the br eath-holding period.
For most exercises, exhale through the sticking point of
the concentric phase and inhale during the eccentric
phase. Exper ienced and well-trained athletes may want
to use the Valsalva maneuver when performing
structural exercises to assist in maintaining proper
vertebral alignment and support.
Weight Belts
The use of a weight belt may help maintain intra-abdominal pressure
during lifting (5, 7). Its appropriateness depends on the type of
exercise performed and the relative load lifted. It is recommended
that a weight belt be worn for exercises that place stress on the
lower back and during sets that use near-maximal or maximal loads.
Adopting this strategy may reduce the risk of lower back injury when
combined with proper lifting and spotting techniques. A drawback to
weight belt use is that wearing a belt too often reduces
opportuni ties for the abdominal and lower back muscles to be
954
trained. Furthermor e, no weight belt is needed for exercises that do
not stress the lower back (e.g., biceps curl or lat pulldown) or for
exercises that do stress the lower back (e.g., back squat or deadl ift)
but in volve the use of l ight loads.
Typically an athlete should wear a weight belt when
performing exercises that place stress on the lower back
and during sets that involve near-maximal or maximal
loads. A weight belt is not needed for exercises that do
not stress the lower back  or for those that do stress the
lower back but involve light loads.
955
Spotting Free W eight Exercises
A spotter  is some one who assists in the execution of an exercise to
help protect the athlete from injury . A spotter may also serve to
motiv ate the athlete and help in the completion of forced
repetitions  (also referred to as partner-assisted reps), but the
spotter’s primary responsibi lity is the safety of the athlete being
spotted. The spotter must realize that poor execution of this
responsibi lity may result in serious injury , not only to the athlete
being spotted but also to the spotter and other individua ls in close
proximity. Although partner -assisted actions are valuable in helping
an athlete benefi t from training, the importance of promoting safety
cannot be o veremphasiz ed.
The remainder of this section offers additional insight on when
and how to spot free weight  exercises. This information provides a
foundation for strength and condi tioning professionals to apply to
their speci fic training en vironment.
Types of Exercises Performed and
Equipment Involved
Free weight exercises  performed over the head (e.g., barbel l
shoulder press) or with the bar on the back (e.g., back squat),
racked anterio rly on the shoulders or on the clavicles (e.g., front
squat) or over the face (e.g., bench press or lying triceps extension),
are more challenging for the athlete to correctly execute than those
in which the bar or dumbbe lls are held or raised at the sides or in
front (e.g., lateral shoulder raise or barbel l biceps curl, respectiv ely)
and therefore should involve one or more spotters. The overhead,
bar-on-the-back or bar-on-the-f ront-shoulders and over-the-f ace
exercises (espe cially using dumbbel ls) also require more skill on the
part of the spotter and are potential ly the most danger ous to the
athlete. Spotting dumbbel l exercises typical ly requires more skill than
spotting barbe ll exercises because there is an additional piece of
956
equipment to observ e and spot. Power exerc ises should not be
spotted.
With the exception of power exercises, free weight
exercises performed with a bar moving over the head,
positioned on the back, racked on the front of the
shoulders, or passing over the face typically require one
or more spotters.
Spotting Overhead Exercises and Those With the Bar
on the Back or Front Shoulders
Ideally, to promote the safety of the athlete, the spotters, and others
nearb y, overhead exercises and those involving the bar on the back
or front shoulders should be performed inside a power rack with the
crossbars in place at an appropriate height. All plates, bars, locks,
and weight -plate trees must be cleared from the lifting area so they
cannot be tripped over or run into and cannot affect the movement
of the bar. Athletes who are not lifting should be instructed to stay
clear of the lifting area. Since the loads lifted in these exercises can
be considerable, to exert sufficient leverage the spotter or spotters
should be at least as strong and at least as tall as the athlete who is
lifting. Out-of-the-rack exercises  (e.g., forward step lunge or
step-up) with heavy weights can result in serious injury . These
exercises should be executed only by well-trained and skilled
athletes and spot ted by experienced pr ofessionals.
Spotting Over-the-Face Exercises
When spotting over-the-face barbell exercises , it is importa nt
for the spotter to grasp the bar with an alternated grip, usually
narrower than the athlete’ s grip. Since the spotter may be called on
to catch the bar or assist in lifting moder ate to heavy loads (usual ly
from a higher vantage point), establ ishing a solid, wide base of
support with the feet and a neutral spine position is critically
important.
957
For dumbbell exercises, it is important to spot as close to the
dumbbel ls as possible or, in a few exercises, to spot the dumbbel l
itself. Although some individuals advocate spotting dumbbel l
movements by placing the hands on the athlete’ s upper arms or
elbows (figure 16.3a), this techniq ue may lead to injury . If the
athlete’ s elbow s “collapse” (i.e., flex), the spotter will not be in a
position to stop the dumbb ells from striking the athlete’ s face or
chest. Spotting at the forearms near the wrists (figure 16.3b) is a
safer technique. Note that for some exercises (e.g., dumbbel l
pullover and overhead dumbbel l triceps extension), it is necessary to
spot wi th hands on the dumbbel l itself.
Do Not Spot Power Exercises
Whereas spotting is recommended in the types of exercises
previously described, it is not advised in power exercises. Instead of
spotting these exercises, the strength and condi tioning professional
needs to teach athletes how to get away from a bar that is
unmanageable. Spotting these types of exercises is too dangerous to
both the spotter and athlet e. Athletes should be instructed that
when they miss the bar in front, they should push the bar away or
simply drop it. They should be taught that if they lose the bar behind
the head, they should release it and jump forward. For these
reasons, the surrounding area or platform should be cleared of other
athletes and equipment bef ore such ex ercises ar e perf ormed.
958
FIGURE 16.3  (a) Incorrect dumbbel l spot ting location.  (b) Correct spot ting location.
Number of Spotters
The number of spotters needed is largely determined by the load
being lifted, the experience and ability of the athlete and spotters,
and the physical strength of the spotters. With heavier loads, the
likelihood and severity of an injury increase. Once the load exceeds
the spotter’s ability to effectively protect the athlete (and him- or
hersel f), another spotter must become involved. On the other hand,
one spotter is preferred if he or she can easily handle the load,
because two or more spotters must coordinate their actions with
those of the athlete. As the number of spotters increases, so does
the chance that an err or in timing or technique ma y occur.
Communication Between Athlete and
Spotter
Communication is the responsibi lity of both the spotter and the
athlete. Before beginning a set, the athlete should tell the spotter
how the bar will initially be handled, how many repetitions will be
performed, and when he or she is ready to move the bar into
position. If spotters do not have this information, they may take
959
control of the bar improperly , too soon, or too late and consequently
disrupt the ex ercise or injur e the athlete.
Use of a Liftoff
The term liftoff  refers to moving the bar from the upright supports
to a position in which the athlete can begin the exercise. Usual ly the
spotter helps place the barbel l or dumbbel ls into the athlete’ s hands
while the elbows are extended and helps to move the barbel l or
dumbbel ls to the proper starting position. Some athletes  may want
the spotter to provide a liftoff; others do not. If a liftoff is needed or
requested, the athlete and spotter need to agree in advance on a
verbal signal (e.g., the comm and “up” or “I will give it to you on the
count of three”). Typical ly, the athlete signals that he or she is
ready; the spotter says, “One, two, three,” and on “three” the bar is
moved into position. Liftoffs are normal ly used in the bench press
(off the supports), should er press (off the supports or the
shoulders), and squat ting exercises if the supports are too low and
nonadjustable. When two spotters are involved and the athlete
wants a liftoff, as with a bench press, one spotter should assist with
the liftoff and then quickly move to the end of the bar to spot (the
other spotter is already at the other end). The spotter providing the
liftoff must be sure that the athlete has complete control of the bar
at the conclusion of the liftoff. If two spotters are used, both should
help the athlete place the bar back onto the supports on completion
of the ex ercise.
Amount and Timing of Spotting Assistance
Knowing how much and when to help an athlete is an important
aspect of spotting, and it requires the spotter to be experienced in
proper spotting techniques. Most athletes typical ly need just enough
help to successfully complet e a repetition through a sticking point
(i.e., a partner -assisted action); other times they might need the
spotter to handle the entire load. At the first indication that a
repetition will be missed, the athlete should quickly ask or signal the
960
spotter (sometimes with just a grunt or sound) for help, and the
spotter needs to immediate ly attempt to provide the amount of
assistance needed. If the athlete cannot contribute anything to the
completion of the repetition, the athlete should immediat ely tell the
spotter to “take it” or use some other phrase agreed on before the
lift. Regardless of when or why the spotter is needed to assist, he or
she should take the bar—if possible—f rom the athlete quickly and
smoothly , trying to avoid abrupt changes in the amount of load
being handled by the athlete. The athlete should try to stay with the
bar until it is racked or placed safely on the floor. This helps to
protect both the spot ter and athlete f rom injury .
The spotting guidel ines provided in the exercise technique
checkl ists are appropriate for a typical training environment. Spotting
procedur es may vary when excessiv ely heavy loads are being used—
such as 1RM at tempts—because mor e spot ters ar e typical ly needed.
Guidelines f or Spotting
Certain exercises that require spotting (over the face or neck and on the back)
have a higher level of difficulty and thus warrant additional safety consider ations.
In any exercise wher e the potential f or injury might oc cur, spot ting should be used.
Spotting is necessary on skillful multijoint exercises that involve a barbel l or
dumbbel ls being lifted over the head, on the back, on the front of the
shoulders, or o ver the f ace.
Exercises done overhead and with a bar racked on the back or in front of the
shoulders may require more than one spotter, and multiple spotters must be
taught how and wher e to spot the ex ercise.
Spotting over-the-f ace exercises requires the spotter to grasp the implement
being lifted or the athlete’ s wrists. Spotters must be trained to grasp the
implement properly and even assist athletes in reracking the bar or returning
dumbbel ls to the start position in case an exercise becomes too difficult to
complete saf ely on their own.
Power exercises are not spotted due to the safety factors for the athlete and
the spotter or spotters, and athletes should be taught how to miss properly
when learning these ex ercises.
Determining the number of spotters for certain exercises depends on a
number of factors, especial ly the amount of load being used, because the
likelihood of injury can incr ease gr eatly wi th hea vier loads.
961
Both spotters and athletes must communicate properly before beginning an
exercise requiring increased safety. They both must take part in this
communication and be clear as to what exercise is being performed and how
many repetitions. Therefore, communic ating on exercises that require a liftoff
is critical to saf ety in these ex ercises.
The liftoff requires a spotter to assist the athlete in getting the implement to
the proper position before beginning the exercise and can require multiple
spotters, depending on the ex ercise.
The spotting guidel ines provided in this chapter should be a fundamental part of
any strength and condi tioning professional’ s training. Safety of athletes in the
weight room is the most important part of supervising and conducting proper
training programs and providing the best and safest atmospher e for athletes  to be
successful in tr aining.
962
Conclusion
It is critically important that the strength and condi tioning
professional provide athletes with proper instruction in resistance
training exercise technique, including the fundamentals of breathing
and weight belt use. Additional ly, the strength and condi tioning
professional needs to teach athletes how and when exercises should
be spotted. Combined with quality supervision and ongoing
feedback, this attention to proper instruction results in a safe
training environment and an effective and appropriate training
stimulus.
RESISTANCE TRAINING EXERCISES
Videos f or exercises identi fied b y this icon 
  can be f ound in
HKPropel.
ABDOMEN
  1  Bent-Knee Si t-Up  418
  2  Abdominal Crunch   418
  3  Abdominal Crunch (Machine)   419
BACK
   4  Bent-Over Row  420
  5  Pendla y Row  421
  6  One-Arm Dumbbel l Row  422
   7  Lat Pul ldown (Machine)   423
   8  Seated R ow (Machine)   424
   9  Low-Pulley Seated R ow (Machine)   425
BICEPS
 10  Barbell Biceps Curl   426
11  Hammer Curl   427
963
CALVES
12  Standing Cal f (Heel) R aise (Machine)   428
13  Seated Cal f (Heel) R aise (Machine)   429
CHEST
 14  Flat B arbell Bench Pr ess (and Dumbbel l Variation)   430
15  Incline Dumbbel l Bench Pr ess (and B arbell Variation)   432
 16  Flat Dumbbel l Fly (and I ncline Variation)   433
 17  Vertical Chest Pr ess (Machine)   434
18  Pec Deck (Machine)   435
FOREARMS
19  Wrist Curl   436
20  Wrist Extension   437
HIPS AND THIGHS
 21  Hip Sled (Machine)   438
 22  Back S quat   439
 23  Front Squat   441
 24  Zercher S quat   443
 25  Forward Step Lunge   445
26  Reverse Step Lunge in Fr ont R ack Position  447
27  Step-Up   449
28  Good Morning   451
29  Deadl ift  452
30  Stiff-Leg Deadl ift  453
31  Romanian Deadl ift (RDL) (and Snatch Grip V ariation)   454
 32  Leg (Knee) Extension (Machine)   455
 33  Seated Leg (Knee) Curl (Machine)   456
SHOULDERS
964
 34  Shoulder Pr ess (Machine)   457
 35  Seated B arbell Shoulder Pr ess (and Dumbbel l Variation)   458
36  Upright R ow  459
37  Lateral Shoulder R aise  460
TRICEPS
 38  Lying B arbell Triceps Extension   461
 39  Triceps Pushdown (Machine)   462
POWER EXERCISES
 40  Push Pr ess  463
 41  Push Jerk   465
 42  Power Clean (and Hang P ower Clean V ariation)   467
 43  Power Snatch (and Hang P ower Snatch V ariation)   469
 44  Clean Grip Mid- Thigh Pul l (and Snatch Grip V ariation)   471
 45  Clean Pul l from Knee-B lock (and Snatch Grip V ariation)   473
Abdomen
  1  BENT-KNEE SIT-UP
Starting Position
Lie in a supine posi tion on a floor mat.
Flex the knees to bring the heels near the but tocks.
Fold the arms acr oss the chest or abdomen.
All repetitions begin f rom this posi tion.
Upward Movement Phase
Flex the neck to mo ve the chin tow ard the chest.
Keeping the feet, buttocks, and lower back neutral and
stationary on the mat, curl the torso toward the thighs until the
upper back is of f the mat.
965
Downward Movement Phase
Uncurl the torso back to the starting posi tion.
Keep the feet, buttocks, lower back, and arms in the same
position.
MAJOR MUSCLE INVOLVED
rectus abdominis
VERBAL CUES
Curl torso toward thighs
Maintain feet on the floor
COMMON ERRORS
Not keeping the feet flat on the floor throughout the
movement
Not lowering the back fully to the ground
966
  2  ABDOMINAL CRUNCH
Starting Position
Lie in a supine posi tion on a floor mat.
Place the heels on a bench with the hips and knees flexed to
about 90 degr ees.
Fold the arms acr oss the chest or abdomen.
All repetitions begin f rom this posi tion.
Upward Movement Phase
Flex the neck to mo ve the chin tow ard the chest.
Keeping the buttocks and lower back neutral and stationary on
the mat, curl the torso toward the thighs until the upper back is
off the mat.
Downward Movement Phase
Uncurl the torso back to the starting posi tion.
Keep the feet, buttocks, lower back, and arms in the same
position.
MAJOR MUSCLE INVOLVED
rectus abdominis
VERBAL CUES
Curl shoulders off floor
Curl shoulders toward thighs
COMMON ERRORS
Raising the heels off the bench during the upward
movement phase
Raising the hips off the floor during the downward
movement phase
967
  3  ABDOMINAL CRUNCH (MACHINE)
Starting Position
Sit down on the machine and press the back firmly against the
back pad.
Place the f eet on the floor and the legs behind the r oller pads.
Position the legs par allel to each other .
Reach back and grasp the handles with a closed, neutral grip
with the back of the upper arms pr essed against the arm pads.
All repetitions begin f rom this posi tion.
Forward Movement Phase
Keeping the buttocks on the seat and the legs stationary , curl
the torso f orward tow ard the thighs.
Backward Movement Phase
Uncurl the torso back to the starting posi tion.
968
Keep the feet, buttocks, lower back, and arms in the same
position.
MAJOR MUSCLE INVOLVED
rectus abdominis
VERBAL CUES
Curl shoulders toward thighs
Maintain contact with the seat
COMMON ERRORS
Raising the buttocks off the seat during the movement
Overemphasizing a pull with the legs or hands to help
curl the torso
Back
   4  BENT-OVER ROW
969
Before Beginning
Grasp the bar wi th a closed, pr onated grip .
Grip should be wider than shoulder -width.
Lift the bar from the floor as described for the deadl ift exercise.
Use a pr onated grip , not an al ternated grip .
Starting Position
Position the feet in a shoulder -width stance with the knees
slightly flex ed.
Flex forward at the hips so the torso is slightly above parallel to
the floor .
Create a neutr al spine posi tion.
Focus the ey es a short distance ahead of the f eet.
Allow the bar to hang wi th the elbows f ully extended.
All repetitions begin f rom this posi tion.
Upward Movement Phase
Pull the bar tow ard the torso .
Keep the torso rigid, back neutr al, and knees sl ightly flex ed.
Do not jerk the torso upw ard.
Touch the bar to the lower chest or upper abdomen.
Downward Movement Phase
Lower the bar back to the starting posi tion.
Maintain the neutral spine and stationary torso and knee
positions.
At the end of the set, flex the hips and knees to place the bar
on the floor and stand up .
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
latissimus dorsi, teres major, middle trapezius, rhomboids,
posterior deltoids
VERBAL CUES
Maintain a flat back (neutral spine)
970
Focus on a point ahead of your toes
Squeeze a pencil between your shoulder blades
COMMON ERRORS
Jerking the upper body, extending the torso, locking out
the knees, curling bar in the hands, or rising on the toes
to help move the bar toward the upper abdomen
Allowing the upper back to round (losing the neutral
spine position) during the movement
  5  PENDLAY ROW
Starting Position
Position the feet in a shoulder -width stance with the knees
slightly flex ed and the barbel l in front.
Flex at the hips and knees to lower the torso until it is parallel
to the floor .
Grasp the bar wi th a closed, pr onated grip .
Grip should be wider than shoulder width.
971
Create a neutr al spine posi tion.
Focus the ey es on the floor a short distance ahead of the f eet.
Allow the bar to rest on the floor with the elbows  fully
extended.
All repetitions begin f rom this posi tion.
Upward Movement Phase
Pull the bar tow ard the torso .
Keep the torso rigid, with back neutral and parallel to the floor
and the knees sl ightly flex ed.
Do not jerk the torso upw ard.
Touch the bar to the lower chest or upper abdomen.
Downward Movement Phase
Lower the bar back to the starting posi tion.
Maintain the neutral spine, parallel torso, and flexed hip and
knee posi tions.
At the end of the set, place the bar on the floor and stand up .
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
latissimus dorsi, teres major, middle trapezius, rhomboids,
posterior deltoids
VERBAL CUES
Elbows high and wide
Reset on each rep
Hips back, not up
COMMON ERRORS
Allowing the upper back to round (losing the neutral
spine position) during the movement
Not maintaining a torso position that is parallel to the
floor
972
  6  ONE-ARM DUMBBELL ROW
Starting Position
Position the feet in a shoulder -width stance with the knees
slightly flex ed.
Flex forward at the hips so the torso is slightly above parallel to
the floor .
Create a neutr al spine posi tion.
Grasp the dumbbel l with a closed, neutr al grip .
Place the opposi te hand on the bench f or support.
Allow the dumbbel l to hang wi th the elbow f ully extended.
All repetitions begin f rom this posi tion.
Upward Movement Phase
Pull the dumbbel l toward the torso, keeping the elbow close to
the body .
Keep the torso rigid, back neutr al, and knees sl ightly flex ed.
Touch the dumbbel l to the side of the torso .
Downward Movement Phase
973
Lower the dumbbel l back to the starting posi tion.
Maintain the neutral spine and stationary torso and flexed knee
positions.
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
latissimus dorsi, teres major, middle trapezius, rhomboids,
posterior deltoids
VERBAL CUES
Lead with the elbow
Pull toward the hip pocket
Full stretch at the bottom of the movement
COMMON ERRORS
Rounding the back and not maintaining a neutral spine
Not fully extending the arm in the downward movement
phase
   7  LAT PULLDOWN (MACHINE)
974
Starting Position
Grasp the bar wi th a closed, pr onated grip .
Grip should be wider than shoulder width.
Sit down on the seat f acing the machine.
Position the thighs under the pads with the feet flat on the floor.
If necessary , adjust the seat and thigh pad.
Lean the torso sl ightly backw ard.
Extend the elbows f ully.
All repetitions begin f rom this posi tion.
Downward Movement Phase
Pull the bar down and tow ard the upper chest.
Maintain the slight torso backw ard lean; do not jerk the torso
backw ard.
Touch the bar to the cla vicle and upper chest ar ea.
Upward Movement Phase
Allow the elbows to slowly extend back to the starting posi tion.
Keep the torso in the same posi tion.
At the end of the set, stand up and return the bar to its resting
position.
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
latissimus dorsi, teres major, middle trapezius, rhomboids,
posterior deltoids
VERBAL CUES
Chest up, shoulders back
Lead with your elbows
Full stretch at the top
COMMON ERRORS
Excessive backward lean and failure to maintain a
neutral spine
975
Pulling the bar down behind the head to the back of the
neck
   8  SEATED ROW (MACHINE)
Starting Position
Sit erect with the feet flat on the platform and press the torso
against the chest pad.
Grasp the handles with a closed grip, either pronated or neutral.
If necessary , adjust the seat height to position the arms
approximately par allel to the floor .
Allow the elbows to extend f ully.
All repetitions begin f rom this posi tion.
976
Backward Movement Phase
Pull the handles tow ard the chest or upper abdomen.
Maintain an erect torso position and keep the elbows next to
the torso .
Pull the handles as f ar back as possible.
Do not jerk the torso backw ard.
Forward Movement Phase
Allow the handles to move forward, back to the starting
position.
Keep the torso in the same posi tion.
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
latissimus dorsi, teres major, middle trapezius, rhomboids,
posterior deltoids
VERBAL CUES
Sit tall
Pull with your elbows
Full stretch at the start
COMMON ERRORS
Moving the chest off the pad
Lifting the feet off the ground or not bracing against the
footrests if available
977
   9  LOW-PULLEY SEATED ROW
(MACHINE)
Starting Position
Sit on the long seat pad (or on the floor if the seat pad is not
available) and place the feet on the foot supports or the
machine f rame.
Grasp the handles wi th a closed grip , either neutr al or pr onated.
Sit in an erect position with the torso perpendicular to the floor,
knees slightly flexed, and the feet and legs parallel to each
other.
Allow the elbows to fully extend with the arms approximately
parallel to the floor .
All repetitions begin f rom this posi tion.
Backward Movement Phase
Pull the handles tow ard the abdomen.
Maintain an erect torso position with the knees in the same
slightly flex ed posi tion. Do not jerk the upper body or lean back.
978
Continue pul ling unti l the handles touch the abdomen.
Forward Movement Phase
Allow the elbows to slowly extend back to the starting posi tion.
Maintain an erect torso position with the knees in the same
slightly flex ed posi tion.
At the end of the set, flex the knees and hips to return the
weight to i ts resting posi tion.
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
latissimus dorsi, teres major, middle trapezius, rhomboids,
posterior deltoids
VERBAL CUES
Sit tall and keep your chest up
Full stretch at the start
Pull handles to your belly button
COMMON ERRORS
Jerking the upper body or leaning back during the
backward movement phase
Flexing the torso forward during the forward phase
979
Biceps
   10  BARBELL BICEPS CURL
Starting Position
Grasp the bar wi th a closed, supinated grip .
Grip should be shoulder width so the arms touch the sides of
the torso .
Stand erect with the feet shoulder -width apart and the knees
slightly flex ed.
Rest the bar on the front of the thighs with the elbows fully
extended.
All repetitions begin f rom this posi tion.
Upward Movement Phase
Flex the elbows unti l the bar is near the anterior del toids.
Keep the torso er ect and the upper arms stationary .
Do not jerk the body or swing the bar upw ard.
Downward Movement Phase
Lower the bar unti l the elbows ar e fully extended.
980
Keep the torso and knees in the same posi tion.
Do not bounce the bar on the thighs between r epetitions.
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
biceps brachii, brachialis, brachioradialis
VERBAL CUES
Pin your elbows to your sides
Curl through the full range
Control the descent
COMMON ERRORS
Jerking the upper body, shrugging the shoulders,
extending the torso, extending the knees, swinging the
bar, or rising on the toes to help raise the bar
Keeping the elbows partially flexed at the end of the
downward movement phase (shortening the ROM)
981
  11  HAMMER CURL
Starting Position
Grasp two dumbbel ls using a closed, neutr al grip .
Stand erect with the feet shoulder -width apart and the knees
slightly flex ed.
Position the dumbbel ls alongside the thighs with the elbows
fully extended.
All repetitions begin f rom this posi tion.
Upward Movement Phase
Keeping the dumbbel l in a neutral grip, flex the elbow of one
arm until the dumbbel l is near the anterior deltoid. The other
arm should be k ept stationary at the side of the thigh.
Keep the torso er ect and the upper arm stationary .
Do not jerk the body or swing the dumbbel l upw ard.
982
Downward Movement Phase
Lower the dumbbel l until the elbow is f ully extended.
Keep the dumbbel l in a neutr al grip posi tion.
Keep the torso and knees in the same posi tion.
Repeat the upward and down ward movement phases with the
other arm (al ternate arms).
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
brachialis, biceps brachii, brachioradialis
VERBAL CUES
Curl up, thumbs to shoulders
Control the descent; imagine crushing something
between your biceps and forearm
COMMON ERRORS
Swinging the body or using a rocking motion instead of a
controlled motion
Not using a full ROM by not lowering the weight fully or
not curling the weight high enough
983
Calves
  12  STANDING CALF (HEEL) RAISE
(MACHINE)
Starting Position
Position the body ev enly under the shoulder pads.
Grasp the handles and place the balls of the feet on the nearest
edge of the step with the legs and feet hip-width apart and
parallel to each other .
Stand erect with the knees fully extended but not forcefully
locked out.
Allow the heels to lower to a comf ortable, str etched posi tion.
All repetitions begin f rom this posi tion.
Upward Movement Phase
984
Keeping the torso erect and the legs and feet parallel, push up
as high as possible on the toes.
Push up of f the step; do not in vert or ev ert the f eet.
Keep the knees extended but not lock ed out.
Downward Movement Phase
Allow the heels to lower slowly back to the starting posi tion.
Maintain the same body posi tion.
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
gastrocnemius, soleus
VERBAL CUES
Push through your toes
Reach for the ceiling
Control the descent
COMMON ERRORS
Insufficient ROM
Significant knee flexion
985
  13  SEATED CALF (HEEL) RAISE
(MACHINE)
Starting Position
Sit erect on the seat and place the balls of the feet on the
nearest edge of the step with the legs and feet hip-width apart
and par allel to each other .
Lower the thigh–knee pad so it firmly presses against the knees
and front of the lower thigh ar ea.
Plantar flex the ankles to r emove the supports.
Allow the heels to lower to a comf ortable, str etched posi tion.
All repetitions begin f rom this posi tion.
Upward Movement Phase
986
Keeping the torso erect and the legs and feet parallel, push up
on the toes as high as possible.
Push up of f the step; do not in vert or ev ert the f eet.
Downward Movement Phase
Allow the heels to lower slowly back to the starting posi tion.
Maintain the same body posi tion.
At the end of the set, return the supports to the starting
position and r emove the f eet.
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
soleus, gastrocnemius
VERBAL CUES
Push through your toes
Squeeze at the top
Control the descent
COMMON ERRORS
Pulling with the hands or jerking the torso to help raise
the weight
Bouncing at the bottom of the movement instead of
performing controlled repetitions
987
Chest
   14  FLAT BARBELL BENCH PRESS
(AND DUMBBELL VARIATION)
This exercise can also be performed with two dumbbel ls, using a
closed, pronate d grip. When using dumbbel ls, the spotter assists by
spotting the athlete’ s forearms near the wrists instead of the bar .
Starting Position: Athlete
Lie in a supine position on a bench in the five-point  body
contact posi tion.
Place the body on the bench so that the eyes are below the
racked bar .
Grasp the bar with a closed,  pronated grip slightly wider than
shoulder -width apart.
988
Signal the spotter for assistance in moving the bar off the
supports.
Position the bar o ver the chest wi th the elbows f ully extended.
All repetitions begin f rom this posi tion.
Starting Position: Spotter
Stand erect and very close to the head of the bench (but do not
distract the athlete).
Place the feet shoulder -width apart with the knees slightly
flexed.
Grasp the bar with a closed, alternated grip inside the athlete’ s
hands.
At the athlete’ s signal, assist with moving the bar off the
supports.
Guide the bar to a posi tion o ver the athlete’ s chest.
Release the bar smoothly .
Downward Movement Phase: Athlete
Lower the bar to touch the chest at appr oximately nipple lev el.
Keep the wrists stiff and the forearms perpendicular to the floor
and par allel to each other .
Maintain the fiv e-point body contact posi tion.
Downward Movement Phase: Spotter
Keep the hands in the alternated grip position close to—but not
touching—the bar as i t descends.
Slightly flex the knees, hips, and torso and keep the back
neutral when f ollowing the bar .
Upward Movement Phase: Athlete
Push the bar upward and very slightly backw ard until the
elbows ar e fully extended.
Keep the wrists stiff and the forearms perpendicular to the floor
and par allel to each other .
Maintain the fiv e-point body contact posi tion.
989
Do not ar ch the back or r aise the chest to meet the bar .
At the end of the set, signal the spotter for assistance in racking
the bar .
Keep a grip on the bar unti l it is racked.
Upward Movement Phase: Spotter
Keep the hands in the alternated grip position close to—but not
touching—the bar as i t ascends.
Slightly extend  the knees, hips, and torso and keep the back
neutral when f ollowing the bar .
At the athlete’ s signal, grasp the bar with an alternate d grip
inside the athlete’ s hands.
Guide the bar back onto the supports.
Keep a grip on the bar unti l it is racked.
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
pectoralis major, anterior deltoids, triceps brachii
VERBAL CUES
Push yourself away from the bar
Try to bend the bar; touch and go
COMMON ERRORS
Bouncing the bar off the chest during the upward
movement phase
Lifting the hips off the bench
Not wrapping the thumbs around the barbell
990
991
15  INCLINE DUMBBELL BENCH PRESS
(AND BARBELL VARIATION)
This exercise can also be performed with a barbel l, using a closed,
pronated grip slightly wider  than shoulder width. When using a
barbel l, the spotter assists by spotting the bar instead of the
forearms near the athlete’ s wrists.
992
Starting Position: Athlete
Grasp two dumbbel ls using a closed, pr onated grip .
Lie in a supine position on an incline bench in the five-point
body contact posi tion.
Signal the spotter for assistance in moving the dumbbel ls into
the starting posi tion.
Press the dumbbel ls in unison to an extended-elbow , parallel-
arm posi tion abo ve the head and f ace.
All repetitions begin f rom this posi tion.
Starting Position: Spotter
Stand erect and very close to the head of the bench (but do not
distract the athlete).
Place the feet shoulder -width apart with the knees slightly
flexed.
Grasp the athlete’ s forearms near the wrists.
At the athlete’ s signal, assist with moving the dumbbel ls to a
position o ver the athlete’ s head and f ace.
Release the athlete’ s forearms smoothly .
Downward Movement Phase: Athlete
Lower the dumbbel ls down and slightly out to be near the
armpi ts and in line with the upper one-thir d area of the chest
(between the cla vicles and the nipples).
Keep the wrists stiff and directly above the elbows, with the
dumbbel l handles al igned wi th each other .
Maintain the fiv e-point body contact posi tion.
Do not ar ch the back or r aise the chest to meet the dumbbel ls.
Downward Movement Phase: Spotter
Keep the hands near—but not touching—the athlete’ s forearms
near the wrists as the dumbbel ls descend.
Slightly flex the knees, hips, and torso and keep the back
neutral when f ollowing the dumbbel ls.
993
Upward Movement Phase: Athlete
Push the dumbbel ls upward at the same rate and very slightly
toward each other unti l the elbows ar e fully extended.
Keep the wrists stiff and directly above the elbows, with the
dumbbel l handles al igned wi th each other .
Maintain the fiv e-point body contact posi tion.
Upward Movement Phase: Spotter
Keep the hands near—but not touching—the athlete’ s forearms
near the wrists as the dumbbel ls ascend.
Slightly extend  the knees, hips, and torso and keep the back
neutral when f ollowing the dumbbel ls.
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
pectoralis major, anterior deltoids, triceps brachii
VERBAL CUES
Maintain a neutral wrist position
Squeeze your chest at the top
Control the descent
COMMON ERRORS
Arching the lower back excessively
Insufficient ROM
994
   16  FLAT DUMBBELL FLY (AND
INCLINE VARIATION)
This exercise can also be performed on an incline bench. If using the
incline variation, begin by positioning the dumbbel ls over the head
and face instead of o ver the chest.
Starting Position: Athlete
Grasp two dumbbel ls using a closed, neutr al grip .
Lie in a supine position on a bench in the five-point  body
contact posi tion.
Signal the spotter for assistance in moving the dumbbel ls into
the starting posi tion.
Press the dumbbel ls in unison to an extended-elbow position
above the chest.
Slightly flex the elbows and point them out to the sides.
All repetitions begin f rom this posi tion.
995
Starting Position: Spotter
Position one knee on the floor with the foot of the other leg
forward and flat on the floor (or kneel on both knees).
Grasp the athlete’ s forearms near the wrists.
At the athlete’ s signal, assist with moving the dumbbel ls to a
position o ver the athlete’ s chest.
Release the athlete’ s forearms smoothly .
Downward Movement Phase: Athlete
Lower the dumbbells in a wide arc until they are level with the
shoulders or chest.
Keep the dumbbel l handles parallel to each other as the elbows
move down ward.
Keep the wrists stiff and the elbows held in a slightly flexed
position.
Keep the hands, wrists, forearms, elbows, upper arms, and
shoulders in the same v ertical plane.
Maintain the fiv e-point body contact posi tion.
Downward Movement Phase: Spotter
Keep the hands near—but not touching—the athlete’ s forearms
near the wrists as the dumbbel ls descend.
Upward Movement Phase: Athlete
Raise the dumb bells up toward each other in a wide arc back to
the starting posi tion.
Keep the wrists stiff and the elbows held in a slightly flexed
position.
Keep the hands, wrists, forearms, elbows, upper arms, and
shoulders in the same v ertical plane.
Maintain the fiv e-point body contact posi tion.
Upward Movement Phase: Spotter
Keep the hands near—but not touching—the athlete’ s forearms
near the wrists as the dumbbel ls ascend.
996
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
pectoralis major, anterior deltoids
VERBAL CUES
Open your arms like you are hugging a tree
Maintain a slight elbow flex throughout the ROM
Control the descent
COMMON ERRORS
Keeping the elbows too extended
Lowering the weights below the shoulder level
997
   17  VERTICAL CHEST PRESS
(MACHINE)
Starting Position
998
Sit down and lean back on the seat in the five-point  body
contact posi tion.
Grasp the handles wi th a closed, pr onated grip .
Align handles with the nipples. If necessary , adjust the seat
height to corr ectly posi tion the handles.
All repetitions begin f rom this posi tion.
Forward Movement Phase
Push the handl es away from the chest to a fully extended elbow
position.
Do not ar ch the lower back or f orcefully lock out the elbows.
Maintain the fiv e-point body contact posi tion.
Backward Movement Phase
Allow the handles to slowly move backw ard to the starting
position.
Maintain the fiv e-point body contact posi tion.
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
pectoralis major, anterior deltoids, triceps brachii
VERBAL CUES
Back flat against the pad
Feet flat on the floor
Push the handles straight out
COMMON ERRORS
Arching the back off the pad while performing the
exercise
Shortening the ROM during the backward movement
phase
999
  18  PEC DECK (MACHINE)
Starting Position
Sit down and lean back on the seat in the five-point  body
contact position. (Note:  Some back pads are not long enough to
allow the back of the head to be in contact wi th the bench. )
Grasp the handles wi th a closed, neutr al grip .
Align the handles with the midchest so that the arms are
parallel to the floor. If necessary , adjust the seat height to
correctly posi tion the handles.
All repetitions begin f rom this posi tion.
Forward Movement Phase
Pull the handles toward each other while maintaining a slight
flex in the elbow , until the fingers touch in f ront of the body .
1000
Do not ar ch the back or lock out the elbows.
Maintain the fiv e-point body contact posi tion.
Backward Movement Phase
Allow the handles to slowly move outward back to the starting
position.
Maintain the fiv e-point body contact posi tion.
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
pectoralis major, anterior deltoids, triceps brachii
VERBAL CUES
Back flat against the pad
Squeeze your chest at the center
Control the return
COMMON ERRORS
Lifting the back off the pad, reducing chest engagement,
and increasing lower back strain
Incomplete ROM; not bringing handles together at the
end of the movement
1001
Forearms
  19  WRIST CURL
Starting Position
Sit on the end of a bench.
Grasp the bar with a closed, supinated grip about hip- to
shoulder -width apart.
Position the feet and legs parallel to each other with the toes
pointing str aight ahead.
Lean the torso forward and place the elbows and forearms on
the top of the thighs.
Move the wrists forward until they extend slightly beyond the
patellae.
1002
Allow the wrists to extend and the hands to open so that the
fingertips hold the bar .
Upward Movement Phase
Raise the bar b y flexing the fingers and then the wrists.
Flex the wrists  as far as possible without moving the elbows or
forearms.
Do not jerk the shoulders backw ard or swing the bar upw ard.
Downward Movement Phase
Allow the wrists and fingers to slowly extend back to the
starting posi tion.
Keep the torso and arms in the same posi tion.
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
flexor carpi ulnaris, flexor carpi radialis, palmaris longus
VERBAL CUES
Wrists off the edge of the bench
Curl only from the wrists
Full ROM
COMMON ERRORS
Not lowering the wrist fully or not curling up completely
Raising the forearms off the support surface during the
movement
1003
  20  WRIST EXTENSION
Starting Position
Sit on the end of a bench.
Grasp the bar with a closed, pronated grip about hip- to
shoulder -width apart.
Position the feet and legs parallel to each other with the toes
pointing str aight ahead.
1004
Lean the torso forward and place the elbows and forearms on
the top of the thighs.
Move the wrists forward until they are slightly beyond the
patellae.
Keep a closed grip on the bar but allow the wrists to flex toward
the floor .
Upward Movement Phase
Raise the bar b y extending the wrists.
Extend the wrists as far as possible without moving the elbows
or forearms.
Do not jerk the body backw ard or swing the bar upw ard.
Downward Movement Phase
Allow the wrists to slowly flex back to the starting posi tion.
Keep the torso and arms in the same posi tion.
Maintain a closed grip .
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
extensor carpi ulnaris, extensor carpi radialis brevis (and
longus)
VERBAL CUES
Keep your wrists aligned with your forearms
Lift from the wrists only
Curl your hands toward ceiling
COMMON ERRORS
Insufficient forearm support and improper wrist
alignment
Allowing the wrist to rotate during the movement
instead of maintaining a consistent plane
1005
Hips and Thighs
   21  HIP SLED (MACHINE)
Starting Position
Sit in the machine with the lower back, hips, and buttocks
pressed against their pads.
1006
Place the feet flat on the platform hip-width apart with the toes
slightly angled out.
Position the legs par allel to each other .
Grasp the handles or the sides of the seat and move the hips
and knees to a fully extended  position, but do not forcefully lock
the knees.
Keep the hips on the seat and the back pressed firmly and
evenly against the back pad.
Remove the support mechanism from the foot platform and
grasp the handles or the seat again.
All repetitions begin f rom this posi tion.
Downward Movement Phase
Allow the hips and knees to slowly flex to lower the platf orm.
Do not al low the platf orm to lower r apidly .
Keep the hips and buttocks on the seat and the back pressed
firmly and ev enly against the back pad.
Keep the knees al igned o ver the f eet as they flex.
Allow the hips and knees to flex until the thighs are parallel to
the foot platf orm.
Do not allow the buttocks to lose contact with the seat, the hips
to roll off the back pad, or the heels to rise off the foot
platform.
Upward Movement Phase
Push the platf orm up b y extending the hips and knees.
Push to a fully extended position, but do not forcefully lock out
the knees.
Maintain the same hip and back position; do not allow the
buttocks to rise.
Keep the knees al igned o ver the f eet as they extend.
At the end of the set, return the supports to the starting
position, r emove the f eet, and exi t the machine.
1007
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
gluteus maximus, semimembranosus, semitendinosus,
biceps femoris, vastus lateralis, vastus intermedius, vastus
medialis, rectus femoris
VERBAL CUES
Toes pointed slightly outward with knees in line with the
toes
Lower the weight until the knees are at 90 degrees
Push through the heel, driving the platform away
COMMON ERRORS
Allowing the heels to lift off the platform
Allowing the knees to move in (via hip adduction) or out
(via hip abduction) during the movement
1008
   22  BACK SQUAT
Starting Position: Athlete
Grasp the bar with a closed, pronated grip (actual width
depends on the bar posi tion).
Step under the bar and posi tion the f eet par allel to each other .
Place the bar in a balanced position on the upper back and
shoulders in one of two locations:
Low bar position. Across the posterior deltoids at the middle
of the trapezius (using a handgrip wider than shoulder
width)
High bar position. Above the posterior deltoids at the base
of the neck (using a handgrip only slightly wider than
shoulder width)
Lift the elbows  up to create a shelf for the bar using the upper
back and shoulder muscles.
Hold the chest up and out.
Tilt the head sl ightly up .
Once in position, signal the spotters for assistance in moving
the bar of f the supports.
Extend the hips and knees to l ift the bar .
Take one or two steps backw ard.
Position the feet shoulder -width apart (or wider), even with
each other , with the toes pointed sl ightly outw ard.
All repetitions begin f rom this posi tion.
Starting Position: Two Spotters
Stand erect at opposi te ends of the bar with the feet shoulder -
width apart and the knees sl ightly flex ed.
Grasp the end of the bar by wrapping the hands around the bar
with the thumbs cr ossed and palms f acing the barbel l.
At the athlete’ s signal, assist with lifting and balancing the bar
as it is mo ved off the supports.
1009
Release the bar smoothly .
Hold the hands 2 to 3 inches (5-8 cm) below the ends of the
bar.
Move sidew ays in unison with the athlete as the athlete moves
backw ard.
Once the athlete is in position, get into a shoulder -width stance
with the knees sl ightly flex ed and the torso er ect.
Downward Movement Phase: Athlete
1010
Maintain a position with the back neutral, elbows high, and the
chest up and out.
Allow the hips and knees to slowly flex while keeping the torso-
to-floor angle r elatively constant.
Keep the heels on the floor and the knees al igned o ver the f eet.
Continue flexin g the hips and knees until the tops of the thighs
are parallel to the floor, the trunk begins to round or flex
forward, or the heels rise of f the floor .
Downward Movement Phase: Two Spotters
Keep the thumbs crossed and hands close to—but not touching
—the bar as i t descends.
Slightly flex the knees, hips, and torso to keep a neutral spine
position when f ollowing the bar .
Upward Movement Phase: Athlete
Maintain a position with neutral spine, high elbows, and the
chest up and out.
Extend the hips and knees at the same rate (to keep the torso-
to-floor angle constant).
Keep the heels on the floor and the knees al igned o ver the f eet.
Do not flex the torso f orward or r ound the back.
Continue extending the hips and knees to reach the starting
position.
At the end of the set, step f orward tow ard the r ack.
Squat down unti l the bar r ests on the supports.
Upward Movement Phase: Two Spotters
Keep the thumbs crossed and hands close to—but not touching
—the bar as i t ascends.
Slightly extend  the knees, hips, and torso and keep the back
neutral when f ollowing the bar .
At the end of the set, move sidew ays in unison with the athlete
back to the r ack.
1011
Simul taneously grasp the bar and assist with balancing the bar
as it is racked.
Release the bar smoothly .
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
gluteus maximus, semimembranosus, semitendinosus,
biceps femoris, vastus lateralis, vastus intermedius, vastus
medialis, rectus femoris
VERBAL CUES
Chest up, head neutral
Spread the floor with your feet
Drive through your heels
COMMON ERRORS
Allowing the heels to lift off the floor, the torso to flex
further forward, or the upper back to round during the
upward phase of the movement
Allowing the knees to move in (via hip adduction) or out
(via hip abduction) during the movement
1012
   23  FRONT SQUAT
Starting Position: Athlete
Step under the bar and posi tion the f eet par allel to each other .
1013
Place the hands on the bar in one of two arm posi tions:
1. Parallel-arm posi tion
Grasp the bar wi th a closed, pr onated grip .
Grip should be sl ightly wider than shoulder width.
Move up to the bar to place i t on top of the anterior
deltoids and cla vicles.
Fully flex the elbows to posi tion the upper arms par allel to
the floor .
2. Crossed- arm posi tion
Flex the elbows and cr oss the arms in f ront of the chest.
Move up to the bar to place i t on top of the anterior
deltoids.
Use an open grip wi th the hands on top of the bar and the
fingers holding i t in place.
Lift the elbows to posi tion the arms par allel to the floor .
Hold the chest up and out.
Tilt the head sl ightly up .
Once in position, signal the spotter for assistance in moving the
bar of f the supports.
Extend the hips and knees to l ift the bar .
Take one or two steps backw ard.
Position the feet shoulder -width apart (or wider), even with
each other , with the toes pointed sl ightly outw ard.
All repetitions begin f rom this posi tion.
1014
Starting Position: Two Spotters
Stand erect at opposi te ends of the bar with the feet shoulder -
width apart and the knees sl ightly flex ed.
Grasp the end of the bar by wrapping the hands around the bar
with the thumbs cr ossed and palms f acing the barbel l.
At the athlete’ s signal, assist with lifting and balancing the bar
as it is mo ved off the supports.
Release the bar smoothly .
Hold the hands 2 to 3 inches (5-8 cm) below the ends of the
bar.
1015
Move sidew ays in unison with the athlete as the athlete moves
backw ard.
Once the athlete is in position, get into a shoulder -width stance
with the knees sl ightly flex ed and the torso er ect.
Downward Movement Phase: Athlete
Maintain a position with the back neutral, elbows high, and the
chest up and out.
Allow the hips and knees to slowly flex while keeping the torso-
to-floor angle r elatively constant.
Keep the heels on the floor and the knees al igned o ver the f eet.
Do not flex the torso f orward or r ound the back.
Continue flexin g the hips and knees until the tops of the thighs
are parallel to the floor, the trunk begins to round or flex
forward, or the heels rise of f the floor .
Downward Movement Phase: Two Spotters
Keep the thumbs crossed and hands close to—but not touching
—the bar as i t descends.
Slightly flex the knees, hips, and torso and keep the back
neutral when f ollowing the bar .
Upward Movement Phase: Athlete
Maintain a position with the back neutral, elbows high, and the
chest up and out.
Extend the hips and knees at the same rate (to keep the torso-
to-floor angle constant).
Keep the heels on the floor and the knees al igned o ver the f eet.
Do not flex the torso f orward or r ound the back.
Continue extending the hips and knees to reach the starting
position.
At the end of the set, step f orward tow ard the r ack.
Squat down unti l the bar r ests on the supports.
Upward Movement Phase: Two Spotters
1016
Keep the thumbs crossed and hands close to—but not touching
—the bar as i t ascends.
Slightly extend  the knees, hips, and torso and keep the back
neutral when f ollowing the bar .
At the end of the set, move sidew ays in unison with the athlete
back to the r ack.
Simul taneously grasp the bar and assist with balancing the bar
as it is placed back on the supports.
Release the bar smoothly .
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
gluteus maximus, semimembranosus, semitendinosus,
biceps femoris, vastus lateralis, vastus intermedius, vastus
medialis, rectus femoris
VERBAL CUES
Create a shelf with your shoulders
Keep your elbows high
Sit between your heels
COMMON ERRORS
Allowing the arms to relax or the elbows to drop down
and backward
Excessive forward lean or raising with the hips first
1017
   24  ZERCHER SQUAT
Starting Position: Athlete
Set a barbel l at approximately mid torso height on a squat rack
or power r ack.
1018
Approach the bar and position it in the crease of the elbows,
resting on the biceps and held tight to the body .
Step under the bar and posi tion the f eet par allel to each other .
Engage the core, retract the shoulder blades, and hold the
chest up and out.
Tilt the head sl ightly up .
Once in position, signal the spotters for assistance in moving
the bar of f the supports.
Extend the hips and knees to l ift the bar .
Take one or two steps backw ard.
Position the feet shoulder -width apart (or wider), even with
each other , with the toes pointed sl ightly outw ard.
All repetitions begin f rom this posi tion.
1019
Starting Position: Two Spotters
Stand erect at opposi te ends of the bar with the feet shoulder -
width apart and the knees sl ightly flex ed.
Grasp the end of the bar by cupping the hands under the bar
with the fingers acr oss each other .
At the athlete’ s signal, assist with lifting and balancing the bar
as it is mo ved off the supports.
1020
Release the bar smoothly .
Hold the hands 2 to 3 inches (5-8 cm) below the ends of the
bar.
Move sidew ays in unison with the athlete as the athlete moves
backw ard.
Once the athlete is in position, get into a shoulder -width stance
with the knees sl ightly flex ed and the torso er ect.
Downward Movement Phase: Athlete
Maintain a position with the back neutral, the arms tight to the
body, and the chest up and out.
Allow the hips and knees to flex slowly while keeping the torso-
to-floor angle r elatively constant.
Keep the heels on the floor and the knees al igned o ver the f eet.
Continue flexin g the hips and knees until the tops of the thighs
are parallel to the floor, the trunk begins to round or flex
forward, or the heels rise of f the floor .
Downward Movement Phase: Two Spotters
Keep the hands cupped and hands close to—but not touching—
the bar as i t descends.
Slightly flex the knees, hips, and torso to keep a neutral spine
position when f ollowing the bar .
Upward Movement Phase: Athlete
Maintain a position with a neutral spine, the elbows held to
body, and the chest up and out.
Extend the hips and knees at the same rate (to keep the torso-
to-floor angle constant).
Keep the heels on the floor and the knees al igned o ver the f eet.
Do not flex the torso f orward or r ound the back.
Continue extending the hips and knees to reach the starting
position.
At the end of the set, step f orward tow ard the r ack.
1021
Squat the bar down unti l it rests on the supports.
Upward Movement Phase: Two Spotters
Keep the hands cupped and close to—but not touching—th e bar
as it ascends.
Slightly extend the knees, hips, and torso, and keep the back
neutral when f ollowing the bar .
At the end of the set, move sidew ays in unison with the athlete
back to the r ack.
Simul taneously grasp the bar and assist with balancing the bar
as it is racked.
Release the bar smoothly .
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
gluteus maximus, semimembranosus, semitendinosus,
biceps femoris, vastus lateralis, vastus intermedius, vastus
medialis, rectus femoris, biceps brachii
VERBAL CUES
Cradle the bar in your elbows
Keep your elbows in
Control your descent
COMMON ERRORS
Not keeping the elbows close to the body
Leaning too far forward
1022
   25  FORWARD STEP LUNGE
This exercise can also be performed with two dumbbel ls, using a
closed, neutral grip. The athlete allows the dumbbel ls to hang at
arm’s length alongside the body throughout the exercise. When
using dumbbel ls, the spotter assists the athlete in the same manner
as in the barbel l version, although the task of helping the athlete
rack the bar is not applicable. (Note:  This exercise cannot be
performed inside a typical power rack. The use of a tiered squat rack
or a power rack that has supports on the outside is recommended.
To allow an optimal view of the exercise technique, a rack is not
shown in the photos. )
Starting Position: Athlete
Step under the bar and posi tion the f eet par allel to each other .
Grasp the bar wi th a closed, pr onated grip .
Place the bar in a balanced position on the upper back and
shoulders above the posterio r deltoids at the base of the neck
(using a handgrip only sl ightly wider than shoulder width).
1023
Lift the elbows  up to create a shelf for the bar using the upper
back and shoulder muscles.
Hold the chest up and out.
Tilt the head sl ightly up .
Once in position, signal the spotter for assistance in moving the
bar of f the supports.
Extend the hips and knees to l ift the bar .
Take two or thr ee steps backw ard.
All repetitions begin f rom this posi tion.
Starting Position: Spotter
Stand erect and very close to the athlete (but do not distract
the athlete).
Place the feet shoulder -width apart with the knees slightly
flexed.
At the athlete’ s signal, assist with lifting and balancing the bar
as it is mo ved out of the r ack.
Move in unison with the athlete as the athlete moves backward
to the starting posi tion.
Once the athlete is in position, get into a hip-width stance with
the knees sl ightly flex ed and the torso er ect.
Stay in position in case the athlete needs assistance. Position
the hands near the athlete’ s hips, waist, or torso if needed to
help stabi lize the athlete.
Forward Movement Phase: Athlete
Take one exagger ated step directly forward with one leg (the
lead leg).
Keep the torso erect as the lead foot moves forward and
contacts the floor .
Keep the trailing foot in the starting position, but allow the
trailing knee to sl ightly flex.
Plant the lead foot flat on the floor pointing straight ahead or
slightly in ward.
1024
Allow the lead hip and knee to flex slowly .
Keep the lead knee dir ectly o ver the lead f oot.
Continue to flex the trailing knee until it is 1 to 2 inches (3-5
cm) abo ve the floor .
Balance the weight evenly between the ball of the trailing foot
and the whole lead f oot.
Keep the torso perpendicular  to the floor by sitting back on the
trailing leg.
Forward Movement Phase: Spotter
Stay in a hip-width stance with the knees slightly flexed and the
torso er ect.
Assist only i f necessary to k eep the athlete balanced.
Backward Movement Phase: Athlete
Forcefully push of f the floor b y extending the lead hip and knee.
1025
Maintain the same erect torso position; do not jerk the upper
body backw ard.
Bring the lead foot back to a position next to the trailing foot;
do not stut ter-step backw ard.
Stand erect in the starting position, pause, and then alternate
lead legs f or the next r epetition.
At the end of the set, step toward the rack and place the bar in
the supports.
Backward Movement Phase: Spotter
Maintain a hip-width stance with the knees slightly flexed and
the torso er ect.
Stand erect in the starting position, and pause to wait for the
athlete to swi tch legs f or the next r epetition.
Stay in a ready position with hips and knees slightly flexed, and
assist only i f necessary to k eep the athlete balanced.
At the end of the set, help the athlete r ack the bar .
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
gluteus maximus, semimembranosus, semitendinosus,
biceps femoris, vastus lateralis, vastus intermedius, vastus
medialis, rectus femoris, iliopsoas
VERBAL CUES
Step forward leading with your heel
Front shin vertical at the bottom
Drive through your front heel
COMMON ERRORS
Stepping out too shallowly, causing the lead knee to
extend too far past the lead foot
Allowing the torso to flex forward during the forward
movement phase
1026
   26  REVERSE STEP LUNGE IN FRONT
RACK POSITION
Note:  This exercise cannot be performed inside a typical power rack.
The use of a tiered squat rack or a power rack that has supports on
the outside is recommende d. To allow an optimal view of the
exercise technique, a r ack and spot ters ar e not shown in the photos.
Starting Position: Athlete
Step tow ard the bar and posi tion the f eet par allel to each other .
Place the hands on the bar in one of two arm posi tions:
1. Parallel-arm posi tion
Grasp the bar wi th a closed, pr onated grip .
Grip should be sl ightly wider than shoulder width.
Move up to the bar to place i t on top of the anterior
deltoids and cla vicles.
Fully flex the elbows to posi tion the upper arms par allel to
the floor .
1027
2. Crossed- arm posi tion
Flex the elbows and cr oss the arms in f ront of the chest.
Move up to the bar to place i t on top of the anterior
deltoids.
Use an open grip wi th the hands on top of the bar and the
fingers holding i t in place.
Lift the elbows to posi tion the arms par allel to the floor .
Hold the chest up and out.
Tilt the head sl ightly up .
Extend the hips and knees to l ift the bar .
Take one or two steps backw ard.
Position the feet shoulder -width apart (or wider), even with
each other , with the toes pointed f orward.
All repetitions begin from this position (note: this preparatory
position is not shown).
Starting Position: Spotter
Stand erect and very close to the athlete (but do not distract
the athlete).
Place the feet shoulder -width apart with the knees slightly
flexed.
At the athlete’ s signal, assist with lifting and balancing the bar
as it is mo ved out of the r ack.
Move in unison with the athlete as the athlete moves backward
to the starting posi tion.
Once the athlete is in position, get into a hip-width stance with
the knees sl ightly flex ed and the torso er ect.
Stay in posi tion in case the athlete needs assistance.
1028
Backward Movement Phase: Athlete
Take one exagger ated step dir ectly backw ard with one leg.
Keep the torso erect as the rear foot moves backw ard and
contacts the floor .
Keep the front foot in the starting position, but allow the
backw ard knee to flex tow ard the floor .
Keep the lead f oot flat on the floor pointing str aight ahead.
Allow the f ront hip and knee to flex slowly .
Keep the f ront knee dir ectly o ver the f ront foot.
Continue to flex the front knee until the rear knee is 1 to 2
inches (3-5 cm) abo ve the floor .
Balance the weight evenly between the ball of the trailing foot
and the whole lead f oot.
1029
Keep the torso perpendicular  to the floor by sitting back on the
rear leg.
Backward Movement Phase: Spotter
Stay in a hip-width stance with the knees slightly flexed and the
torso er ect.
Assist only i f necessary to k eep the athlete balanced.
Forward Movement Phase: Athlete
Forcefully push off the floor by extending the front hip and
knee.
Maintain the same erect torso position; do not jerk the upper
body f orward.
Bring the rear foot back to a position next to the lead foot; do
not stut ter-step f orward.
Stand erect in the starting position, pause, and then alternate
lead legs f or the next r epetition.
At the end of the set, step toward the rack and place the bar in
the supports.
Forward Movement Phase: Spotter
Maintain a hip-width stance with the knees slightly flexed and
the torso er ect.
Stand erect in the starting position and pause to wait for the
athlete to swi tch legs f or the next r epetition.
Stay in a ready position with hips and knees slightly flexed, and
assist only i f necessary to k eep the athlete balanced.
At the end of the set, help the athlete r ack the bar .
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
gluteus maximus, semimembranosus, semitendinosus,
biceps femoris, vastus lateralis, vastus intermedius, vastus
medialis, rectus femoris, iliopsoas, soleus, gastrocnemius
VERBAL CUES
1030
Elbows high and forward
Step back and lower straight down
Drive through your front foot
COMMON ERRORS
Leaning forward excessively
Overextending the backward step
  27  STEP-UP
Note:  The box used should be 12 to 18 inches (30-46 cm) high, or
high enough to create a 90-degree angle at the knee joint when the
foot is on the box. To allow an optimal view of the exercise
technique, a r ack is not shown in the photos.
Starting Position: Athlete
Grasp the bar wi th a closed, pr onated grip .
1031
Step under the bar and posi tion the f eet par allel to each other .
Place the bar in a balanced position on the upper back and
shoulders above the posterio r deltoids at the base of the neck
(using a handgrip only sl ightly wider than shoulder width).
Lift the elbows  up to create a shelf for the bar using the upper
back and shoulder muscles.
Hold the chest up and out.
Tilt the head sl ightly up .
Once in position, signal the spotter for assistance in moving the
bar of f the supports.
Extend the hips and knees to l ift the bar .
Move to a spot near the f ront of the bo x.
All repetitions begin f rom this posi tion.
Starting Position: Spotter
Stand erect and very close to the athlete (but do not distract
the athlete).
Place the feet shoulder -width apart with the knees slightly
flexed.
At the athlete’ s signal, assist with lifting and balancing the bar
as it is mo ved out of the r ack.
Move in unison with the athlete as the athlete moves to the
starting posi tion.
Once the athlete is in position, get into a hip-width stance with
the knees sl ightly flex ed and the torso er ect.
Stay in a ready position with hips and knees slightly flexed, and
assist only i f necessary to k eep the athlete balanced.
Upward Movement Phase: Athlete
Step up with one leg (the lead leg) to place the entire foot on
the top of the bo x.
Keep the torso er ect; do not lean f orward.
1032
Keep the trailing foot in the starting position, but shift the body
weight to the lead leg.
Forcefully extend the lead hip and knee to move the body to a
standing posi tion on top of the bo x.
Do not push of f or hop up wi th the tr ailing leg or f oot.
At the highest position, stand  erect and pause before beginning
the down ward movement phase.
Upward Movement Phase: Spotter
Take a small step forward with the lead leg as the athlete  steps
up on the bo x.
As the athlete reaches the highest position, bring the trailing leg
forward to be next to the lead leg.
Stay in a ready position with hips and knees flexed, and assist
only when necessary to k eep the athlete balanced.
Downward Movement Phase: Athlete
Shift the body weight to the same lead leg.
1033
Step of f the bo x with the same tr ailing leg.
Maintain an er ect torso posi tion.
Place the trailing foot on the floor the same distance from the
box as the starting posi tion.
When the trailing foot is in full contact with the floor, shift the
body weight to the tr ailing leg.
Step of f the bo x with the lead leg.
Bring the lead f oot back to a posi tion next to the tr ailing foot.
Stand erect in the starting position, pause, and then alternate
lead legs f or the next r epetition.
At the end of the set, step toward the rack and place the bar in
the supports.
Downward Movement Phase: Spotter
Take a small step backw ard with the same trailing leg as the
athlete steps back down to the floor .
As the athlete steps off the box with the lead leg, take a step
backw ard with the same lead leg.
Keep the hands near the athlete’ s hips, w aist, or torso .
Stand erect in the starting position and pause to wait for the
athlete.
Assist only i f necessary to k eep the athlete balanced.
At the end of the set, help the athlete r ack the bar .
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
gluteus maximus, semimembranosus, semitendinosus,
biceps femoris, vastus lateralis, vastus intermedius, vastus
medialis, rectus femoris
VERBAL CUES
Chest up and shoulders back
Drive through your heel, and push the box away from
you
1034
Stand tall at the top of the box
COMMON ERRORS
Pushing off with the back leg to assist with upward
movement
Flexing too far forward at the hips, causing a forward
lean
  28  GOOD MORNING
Note:  To allow an optimal view of the exercise technique, a rack is
not shown in the photos.
Starting Position
Grasp the bar wi th a closed, pr onated grip .
Step under the bar and posi tion the f eet par allel to each other .
1035
Place the bar in a balanced position on the upper back and
shoulders above the posterio r deltoids at the base of the neck
(using a handgrip only sl ightly wider than shoulder width).
Lift the elbows  up to create a shelf for the bar using the upper
back and shoulder muscles.
Hold the chest up and out.
Tilt the head sl ightly up .
Position the feet shoulder -width apart (or wider), even with
each other , with the toes pointed sl ightly outw ard.
Extend the hips and knees to l ift the bar of f the supports.
Take two or thr ee steps backw ard.
All repetitions begin f rom this posi tion.
Downward Movement Phase
Begin the exercise by slowly  permi tting the hips to flex. The
buttocks should mo ve straight back during the descent.
Maintain a neutral spine and high elbow position; do not round
the upper back during the descent.
Keep the knees slightly flexed and the feet flat on the floor
during the descent.
Continue the down ward movement until the torso is
approximately par allel to the floor .
Upward Movement Phase
Raise the bar b y extending the hips.
Keep the back neutral and the knees slightly flexed during the
ascent.
Continue extending the hips to r each the starting posi tion.
At the end of the set, step toward the rack and place the bar in
the supports.
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
gluteus maximus, semimembranosus, semitendinosus,
biceps femoris, erector spinae
1036
VERBAL CUES
Soft flex of the knees
Hinge at the hips and push your hips backward
Chest up, shoulders back
COMMON ERRORS
Rounding the back and not maintaining a neutral spine
position
Flexing the knees too much, turning the movement into
a squat instead of a hip hinge
  29  DEADLIFT
Starting Position
1037
Stand with the feet flat and placed between hip- and shoulder-
width apart wi th the toes pointed sl ightly outw ard.
Squat down with the hips lower than the shoulders (farther
than shown in the first photo and video clip), and grasp the bar
with a closed, pronated grip. If the load is too heavy to hold the
bar wi th a pr onated grip , change to a closed, al ternated grip .
Place the hands on the bar slightly wider than shoulder -width
apart, outside of the knees, wi th the elbows f ully extended.
Place the feet flat on the floor and position the bar
approximately 1 inch (3 cm) in front of the shins and over the
balls of the f eet.
Position the body wi th the
back neutr al or sl ightly ar ched,
scapulae depr essed and r etracted,
chest held up and out,
head in line with the vertebr al column or slightly
hyperextended,
heels in contact wi th the floor ,
shoulders o ver or sl ightly in f ront of the bar , and
eyes focused str aight ahead or sl ightly upw ard.
All repetitions begin f rom this posi tion.
Upward Movement Phase
Lift the bar of f the floor b y extending the hips and knees.
Keep the torso-to-floor angle  constant; do not let the hips rise
before the shoulders.
Maintain a neutr al spine posi tion.
Keep the elbows fully extended and the shoulders over or
slightly ahead of the bar .
As the bar is r aised, k eep it as close to the shins as possible.
As the bar rises just above the knees, keep the shoulders over
the bar and extend the hips to k eep the bar close to the body .
1038
Continue to extend the hips and knees until the body reaches a
fully erect torso posi tion.
Downward Movement Phase
Allow the hips and knees to flex to slowly lower the bar to the
floor.
Maintain the neutral spine position; do not flex the torso
forward.
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
gluteus maximus, semimembranosus, semitendinosus,
biceps femoris, vastus lateralis, vastus intermedius, vastus
medialis, rectus femoris
VERBAL CUES
Chest up and shoulders back
Push the floor away from you
Stand tall and squeeze your glutes
COMMON ERRORS
Allowing the bar to drift away from the body
Failing to lock out completely
1039
30  STIFF-LEG DEADLIFT
Starting Position
After performing the deadl ift exercise to lift the bar off the floor,
slightly to moder ately flex the knees and keep them in this
position thr oughout this ex ercise.
All repetitions begin f rom this posi tion.
Downward Movement Phase
Begin the exercise by forming a neutral spine, then flex at the
hips to lower the bar slowly , and under full control, toward the
floor.
Keep the knees in the same slightly or moder ately flexed
position with the back neutral or slightly arched and the elbows
fully extended during the descent.
Lower the bar until the plates touch the floor; the back cannot
move out of the neutral position, the knees fully extend, or the
heels rise of f of the floor .
Upward Movement Phase
Extend at the hips to r eturn to the standing starting posi tion.
1040
Keep the knees slightly flexed and the torso in a neutral spine
position.
Do not jerk the torso backw ard or flex the elbows.
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
gluteus maximus, semimembranosus, semitendinosus,
biceps femoris, erector spinae
VERBAL CUES
Hinge at the hip
Keep your back flat
Keep your weight in your heels
COMMON ERRORS
Not maintaining a neutral spine
Bouncing the weight off floor
Actively flexing the knees
1041
  31  ROMANIAN DEADLIFT (RDL) (AND
SNATCH GRIP VARIATION)
Starting Position
Place the hands on the bar in a closed, pronated position using
either a clean or snatch grip .
After performing the deadl ift exercise to lift the bar off the floor,
slightly to moder ately flex the knees and keep them in this
position throughout this exercise. (Note:  The knees should be
slightly mor e flex ed than shown in the video .)
All repetitions begin f rom this posi tion.
Downward Movement Phase
Begin the exercise by flexing the hips and pushing them
backw ard, allowing the torso to move forward, keeping the bar
in contact wi th the thighs.
Keep the knees sl ightly flex ed as the hips flex.
Maintain a rigid torso, neutral spine, and keep the shoulders
retracted until the barbel l is aligned with the patella tendon and
the torso is parallel to floor. (Note:  If using a snatch grip with
this exercise, the torso will be slightly below parallel, depending
on the athlete’ s anthr opometrics. )
Keep a normal lor dotic posi tion thr oughout the mo vement.
Upward Movement Phase
Extend the hips, raising the torso back to the starting standing
position.
Keep the knees slightly flexed and the torso in a neutral spine
position.
Make sure the barbel l maintains contact with the thighs
throughout the mo vement.
Do not h yperextend the back or flex the elbows.
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
1042
gluteus maximus, semimembranosus, semitendinosus,
biceps femoris, erector spinae
VERBAL CUES
Soft flex of the knees
Push your hips back
Slide the bar down your thighs
COMMON ERRORS
Rounding the back and not maintaining a neutral spine
position
Allowing the bar to drift away from the body
Not pushing the hips back far enough, reducing
hamstring engagement
1043
   32  LEG (KNEE) EXTENSION
(MACHINE)
Starting Position
Sit down in the machine and press the back firmly against the
back pad.
Place the f eet behind and in contact wi th the r oller pad.
Position the legs par allel to each other .
1044
Align the knees with the axis of the machine. If necessary,
adjust the back pad or the roller pad to position the legs
correctly.
Grasp the handles or the sides of the seat.
All repetitions begin f rom this posi tion.
Upward Movement Phase
Raise the r oller pad b y fully extending the knees.
Keep the torso erect and the back firmly pressed against the
back pad.
Keep the thighs, lower legs, and f eet par allel to each other .
Maintain a tight grip on the handles or the sides of the seat.
Do not f orcefully lock out the knees.
Downward Movement Phase
Allow the knees to slowly flex back to the starting posi tion.
Keep the torso erect and the back firmly pressed against the
back pad.
Keep the thighs, lower legs, and f eet par allel to each other .
Do not al low the but tocks to l ift off the seat.
Maintain a tight grip on the handles or the sides of the seat.
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
vastus lateralis, vastus intermedius, vastus medialis, rectus
femoris
VERBAL CUES
Point your toes toward your shins
Lift with your thighs
Slow and controlled on the way down
COMMON ERRORS
Allowing the hips or buttocks to lift off the seat during
the upward movement
1045
Swinging or jerking the torso backwards to help raise
the weight
Forcefully locking out the knees at the end of the upward
movement phase
   33  SEATED LEG (KNEE) CURL
(MACHINE)
Starting Position
Sit down in the machine and press the back firmly against the
back pad.
Place the ankles on top of and in contact wi th the r oller pad.
Position the legs par allel to each other .
Align the knees with the axis of the machine. If necessary,
adjust the back pad to posi tion the legs corr ectly.
Grasp the handles or the sides of the seat.
All repetitions begin f rom this posi tion.
Downward Movement Phase
1046
Curl the r oller pad below the seat b y fully flexing the knees.
Keep the torso stationary and the hips and torso firmly pressed
against the pads.
Do not al low the hips or low back to l ift off the pads.
Maintain a tight grip on the handles or the sides of the seat.
Upward Movement Phase
Allow the knees to slowly extend back to the starting posi tion.
Keep the torso stationary and the hips and low back firmly
pressed against the pads.
Maintain a tight grip on the handles or the sides of the seat.
Do not f orcefully lock out the knees.
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
semimembranosus, semitendinosus, biceps femoris
VERBAL CUES
Pull your heels toward your glutes
Maintain tension throughout the movement
Keep your upper body still
COMMON ERRORS
Raising the hips off the seat to assist in the movement
Allowing the weight to fall back too quickly during the
eccentric phase
Incomplete ROM
1047
Shoulders
   34  SHOULDER PRESS (MACHINE)
Starting Position
Sit down and lean back to place the body in the five-point body
contact posi tion.
Grasp the handles wi th a closed, pr onated grip .
Align the handles with the top of the shoulders. If necessary ,
adjust the seat height to posi tion the handles corr ectly.
Upward Movement Phase
Push the handles upw ard unti l the elbows ar e fully extended.
Maintain the fiv e-point body contact posi tion.
Do not ar ch the lower back or f orcefully lock out the elbows.
Downward Movement Phase
Allow the elbows to slowly flex to lower the handles to the
starting posi tion.
Maintain the fiv e-point body contact posi tion.
1048
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
anterior and medial deltoids, triceps brachii
VERBAL CUES
Sit tall with your feet flat on the floor
Push your hands toward the ceiling
Control the descent
COMMON ERRORS
Excessively arching the back during the upward
movement phase
Not executing the movement through a full ROM
1049
   35  SEATED BARBELL SHOULDER
PRESS (AND DUMBBELL VARIATION)
This exercise can also be performed with two dumbbel ls, using a
closed, pronate d grip. When using dumbbel ls, the spotter assists by
spotting the athlete’ s forearms near the wrists instead of the bar .
Starting Position: Athlete
Sit down on a vertical shoulder press bench and lean back to
place the body in the fiv e-point body contact posi tion.
Grasp the bar wi th a closed, pr onated grip .
Grip should be sl ightly wider than shoulder width.
Signal the spotter for assistance in moving the bar off the
supports.
Press the bar o ver the head unti l the elbows ar e fully extended.
All repetitions begin f rom this posi tion.
Starting Position: Spotter
Stand erect behind the bench with the feet shoulder -width apart
and the knees sl ightly flex ed.
Grasp the bar with a closed, alternated grip inside the athlete’ s
hands.
At the athlete’ s signal, assist with moving the bar off the
supports.
Guide the bar to a posi tion o ver the athlete’ s head.
Release the bar smoothly .
Downward Movement Phase: Athlete
Allow the elbows to slowly flex to lower the bar .
Keep the wrists sti ff and the f orearms par allel to each other .
Extend the neck slightly to allow the bar to pass by the face as
it is lower ed to touch the cla vicles and anterior del toids.
Maintain the fiv e-point body contact posi tion.
Downward Movement Phase: Spotter
1050
Keep the hands in the alternated grip position close to—but not
touching—the bar as i t descends.
Keep the knees slightly flexed and the back neutral when
following the bar .
Upward Movement Phase: Athlete
Push the bar upw ard unti l the elbows ar e fully extended.
Extend the neck slightly to allow the bar to pass by the face as
it is raised.
Keep the wrists sti ff and the f orearms par allel to each other .
Maintain the fiv e-point body contact posi tion.
Do not ar ch the back or rise of f the seat.
At the end of the set, signal the spotter for assistance in racking
the bar .
Keep a grip on the bar unti l it is racked.
Upward Movement Phase: Spotter
1051
Keep the hands in the alternated grip position close to—but not
touching—the bar as i t ascends.
Slightly extend  the knees, hips, and torso and keep the back
neutral when f ollowing the bar .
At the athlete’ s signal after the set is completed, grasp the bar
with an al ternated grip inside the athlete’ s hands.
Guide the bar back onto the supports.
Keep a grip on the bar unti l it is racked.
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
anterior and medial deltoids, triceps brachii
VERBAL CUES
Push toward the ceiling
Bar path in front of your face
Push your head through at the top
COMMON ERRORS
Excessive arching of the lower back
Bar path drifting backward
  36  UPRIGHT ROW
Starting Position
Grasp the bar with a closed, pronated grip approximately
shoulder -width apart or sl ightly wider .
Stand erect with feet shoulder-width apart, knees slightly
flexed.
Rest the bar on the front of the thighs with the elbows fully
extended and pointing out to the sides.
Upward Movement Phase
Pull the bar up along the abdomen and chest tow ard the chin.
1052
Keep the elbows pointed out to the sides as the bar brushes
against the body .
Keep the torso and knees in the same posi tion.
Do not rise up on the toes or swing the bar upw ard.
At the highest bar position, the elbows should be level with or
slightly higher than the shoulders and wrists.
Downward Movement Phase
Allow the bar to slowly descend back to the starting posi tion.
Keep the torso and knees in the same posi tion.
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
deltoids, upper trapezius
VERBAL CUES
Lead with your elbows
Keep the bar close to your body
Think about drawing a straight line up your torso with
the bar
COMMON ERRORS
Not maintaining an erect torso throughout the
movement
Not keeping the bar close to the body
Lifting through the wrists and not the elbows
1053
  37  LATERAL SHOULDER RAISE
Starting Position
Grasp two dumbbel ls with a closed, neutr al grip .
Position the feet shoulder - or hip-width apart, with the knees
slightly flexed, torso erect, shoulders back, and eyes focused
ahead.
Move the dumbbel ls to the front of the thighs, positioning them
with the palms f acing each other .
Slightly flex the elbows and hold this flexed position throughout
the exercise. (Note:  The elbows should be slightly more flexed
than what is seen in the photos. )
Upward Movement Phase
Raise the dumbbel ls up and out to the sides; the elbows and
upper arms should rise together ahead of the forearms, hands,
and dumbbel ls.
Maintain an erect upper body position with the knees slightly
flexed and f eet flat.
Do not jerk the body or swing the dumbbel ls upw ard.
Continue raising the dumbbel ls until the arms are approximately
parallel to the floor or nearly lev el with the shoulders.
1054
Downward Movement Phase
Allow the dumbbel ls to descend slowly back to the starting
position.
Keep the torso and knees in the same posi tion.
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
deltoids
VERBAL CUES
Raise your arms to shoulder height
Imagine pouring water from pitchers
Lower slowly
COMMON ERRORS
Swinging the body to lift the weights instead of using
controlled shoulder movement
Raising the arms above shoulder level
Dropping the weights quickly instead of lowering them
under control
1055
Triceps
   38  LYING BARBELL TRICEPS
EXTENSION
Starting Position: Athlete
Lie in a supine position on a bench in the five-point  body
contact posi tion.
Grasp the bar from the spotter with a closed, pronated grip
about 12 inches (30 cm) wide.
Position the bar over the chest with the elbows fully extended
and the arms par allel.
Point the elbows tow ard the knees (not out to the sides).
All repetitions begin f rom this posi tion.
Starting Position: Spotter
Stand erect and very close to the head of the bench (but do not
distract the athlete).
1056
Place the feet shoulder -width  apart in a stagger ed stance with
the knees sl ightly flex ed.
Grasp the bar wi th a closed, al ternated grip .
Hand the bar to the athlete.
Guide the bar to a posi tion o ver the athlete’ s chest.
Release the bar smoothly .
Downward Movement Phase: Athlete
Keeping the upper arms stationary , allow the elbows to slowly
flex to lower the bar tow ard the f ace.
Keep the wrists stiff and the upper arms perpendicular to the
floor and par allel to each other .
Lower the bar unti l it almost touches the head or f ace.
Maintain the fiv e-point body contact posi tion.
Downward Movement Phase: Spotter
Place the hands close to—but not touching—the bar as it
descends.
Slightly flex the knees, hips, and torso and keep the back
neutral when f ollowing the bar .
Upward Movement Phase: Athlete
Push the bar upward by extending the elbows back to the
starting posi tion.
Keep the wrists sti ff and the elbows pointed tow ard the knees.
Keep the upper arms parallel to each other and perpendicular to
the floor .
Maintain the fiv e-point body contact posi tion.
At the end of the set, signal the spot ter to tak e the bar .
Keep a grip on the bar unti l the spot ter removes it.
Upward Movement Phase: Spotter
Keep the hands close to—but not touching—the bar as it
ascends.
1057
Slightly extend  the knees, hips, and torso and keep the back
neutral when f ollowing the bar .
At the athlete’ s signal after the set is completed, grasp the bar
with an alternated grip, take it from the athlete, and set it on
the floor .
MAJOR MUSCLE INVOLVED
triceps brachii
VERBAL CUES
Elbows point toward the ceiling
Push knuckles to ceiling
Extend arms fully at the top
COMMON ERRORS
Allowing the elbows to flare to the sides during the
movement
Flexing the wrists instead of keeping them in a neutral
position aligned with the forearm
1058
   39  TRICEPS PUSHDOWN (MACHINE)
Starting Position
Grasp the bar with a closed, pronated grip 6 to 12 inches (16-
30 cm) wide.
1059
Stand erect with feet shoulder-width apart, knees slightly
flexed. Place the body close enough to the machine to allow the
cable to hang straight down when it is held in the starting
position.
Pull the bar down to position the upper arms against the sides
of the torso .
Flex the elbows to position the forearms parallel to the floor or
slightly abo ve.
All repetitions begin f rom this posi tion.
Downward Movement Phase
Push the bar down unti l the elbows ar e fully extended.
Keep the torso er ect and the upper arms stationary .
Do not f orcefully lock out the elbows.
Upward Movement Phase
Allow the elbows to slowly flex back to the starting posi tion.
Keep the torso , arms, and knees in the same posi tion.
At the end of the set, r eturn the bar to i ts resting posi tion.
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
triceps brachii
VERBAL CUES
Elbows tight to your sides
Full extension at the bottom
Slow on the way up
COMMON ERRORS
Not fully extending the arms at the bottom of the ROM or
not returning to the starting position at the top
Allowing the weight to move quickly in an uncontrolled
manner during the upward phase of the movement
instead of controlling it
1060
Power Exercises
   40  PUSH PRESS
This exercise consists of quickly and forcefully pushing the bar from
the shoulders to over the head. Although the ascent consists of two
phases, the upward movement of the bar occurs in one continuous
motion without interruption. Both the push press and the push jerk
exercises involve a rapid hip and knee extension that accelerates the
bar off the shoulders, followed immediately by movements that
position the bar overhead. The technique used to attain this final bar
position varies, howev er. In the push press, the hip and knee
extension thrust is only forceful enough to drive the bar one-hal f to
two-thir ds the distance overhead. From this height, the bar is
pressed out to the overhead position, with the hips and knees
remaining f ully extended after the thrust.
For either exercise, the athlete can begin with a bar taken from
shoulder -height supports outside a power rack or by lifting a bar
from the floor to the shoulders (via a repetition of the power clean
1061
exercise). Both exercises may be performed behind the neck using
either a clean grip or a snatch grip. The following checkl ists describe
the ex ercises using a power r ack (al though the r ack is not shown).
Starting Position
Grasp the bar wi th a closed, pr onated grip .
Grip should be sl ightly wider than shoulder -width (clean grip).
Step under the bar and position the feet hip-width apart and
parallel to each other .
Move up to the bar to place it on top of the anterior deltoids
and cla vicles.
Extend the hips and knees to l ift the bar of f the supports.
Step back away from the supports and stand in the middle of
the lifting platf orm.
Position the feet hip- to shoulder -width apart and even with
each other , with the toes pointed sl ightly outw ard.
All repetitions begin f rom this posi tion.
Preparation Phase: Dip
Flex the hips and knees at a controlled speed to move the bar
in a str aight path down ward.
Continue the dip to a depth not to exceed a quarter squat, the
catch position of the powe r clean, or 10% of the athlete’ s
height.
Keep the feet flat on the floor, the torso erect, and the elbows
underneath or sl ightly ahead of the bar .
Upward Movement Phase: Drive
Immediately on reaching the lowest position of the dip, reverse
the movement by forcefully and quickly extending the hips,
knees, and ankles and then the elbows to move the bar
overhead.
1062
Catch (for the Push Press)
After the hips and knees are fully extended and the bar is
overhead from the drive phase, press it up the rest of the way
until the elbows ar e fully extended.
In this position the torso is erect, the head is in a neutral
position, the feet are flat on the floor, and the bar is slightly
over or behind the ears.
Downward Movement Phase
Lower the bar by gradual ly reducing the muscular tension of the
arms to al low a contr olled descent of the bar to the shoulders.
Simul taneously flex the hips and knees to cushion the impact of
the bar on the shoulders.
At the end of the set, step toward the rack and place the bar in
the supports.
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
gluteus maximus, semimembranosus, semitendinosus,
biceps femoris, vastus lateralis, vastus intermedius, vastus
1063
medialis, rectus femoris, soleus, gastrocnemius, deltoids,
trapezius
VERBAL CUES
Initiate dip with hips, not knees
Drive from your heels
Punch hands to sky
COMMON ERRORS
Pushing hips back during the dip
Dropping the elbows too much during the dip (as seen in
the photos on the previous page)
Shifting to the toes during the dip
Note:  The upper arms should be pointing away from the body, not toward the floor, in
the starting position through the dip. The result is about 45 degrees of shoulder flexion
1064
in the sagi ttal plane.
   41  PUSH JERK
The push jerk involves a more forceful hip and knee thrust so that
the bar is actual ly driven upward and caught with extended elbows
in the o verhead posi tion wi th the hips and knees sl ightly flex ed.
Starting Position
Grasp the bar wi th a closed, pr onated grip .
Grip should be sl ightly wider than shoulder -width (clean grip).
Step under the bar and position the feet hip- to shoulder -width
apart and par allel to each other .
Move close to the bar so that it is resting on the anterior
deltoids and cla vicles.
Extend the hips and knees to l ift the bar out of the supports.
Step back away from the supports and stand in the middle of
the lifting platf orm.
Position the feet hip-width apart or slightly wider with toes
pointed str aight ahead or sl ightly outw ard.
All repetitions begin f rom this posi tion.
Preparation Phase: Dip
Flex the hips and knees at a controlled speed to move the bar
in a str aight path down ward.
Continue the dip to a depth not to ex ceed a quarter squat.
Keep the feet flat on the floor, the torso erect, and the elbows
underneath or sl ightly ahead of the bar .
1065
Note:  The upper arms should be pointing away from the body, not toward the floor, in
the starting position through the dip. The result is about 45 degrees of shoulder flexion
in the sagi ttal plane.
Upward Movement Phase: Drive
Immediately on reaching the lowest position of the dip, reverse
the movement by forcefully and quickly extending the hips,
knees, and ankles, and then the elbows to move the bar
overhead.
Catch (for the Push Jerk)
After the hips and knees are fully extended and the bar is being
driven overhea d, quickly flex the hips and knees to a dipped
position while simultaneously fully extending the elbows so that
the bar is received overhead at the same moment that the bar
reaches i ts highest posi tion.
1066
Catch the bar with the torso erect, the head in neutral position,
feet flat on the floor, and the bar slightly behind the head,
forming a str aight l ine thr ough the body .
Recovery Phase
After gaining control and balance, stand up by extending the
hips and knees to a fully erect position with the feet flat on the
floor.
Keep the elbows lock ed whi le the bar is stabi lized overhead.
Downward Movement Phase
Lower the bar by gradual ly reducing the muscular tension of the
arms to al low a contr olled descent of the bar to the shoulders.
Simul taneously flex the hips and knees to cushion the impact of
the bar on the shoulders.
At the end of the set, step toward the rack and place the bar in
the supports.
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
gluteus maximus, semimembranosus, semitendinosus,
biceps femoris, vastus lateralis, vastus intermedius, vastus
medialis, rectus femoris, soleus, gastrocnemius, deltoids,
trapezius
VERBAL CUES
Initiate the dip with the hips
Drive from your heels
Punch your hands to the sky
COMMON ERRORS
Pushing hips back during the dip
Dropping the elbows too much during the dip (as seen in
the photos on the previous page)
Shifting to the toes during the dip
1067
   42  POWER CLEAN (AND HANG
POWER CLEAN VARIATION)
This exercise consists of quickly and forcefully pulling the bar from
the floor to a catching position on the front of the should ers—all in
one movement. Although the lift consists of four phases (i.e., first
pull, transition, second pull, and catch) the upward movement of the
bar occurs in one continuous motion without interruption . While the
power clean is commonly performed by taking the barbel l from the
floor, it can also be performed from a hang position (i.e., at the
power position or a position above or below the knee). When a hang
power clean is performed, the bar is not returned to the floor or
blocks between r epetitions.
Starting Position
Stand with the feet placed between hip- and shoulder -width
apart wi th the toes pointed sl ightly outw ard (based on comf ort).
1068
Squat down with the hips lower than the shoulders and grasp
the bar evenly with a pronated grip and the shoulder directly
above or slightly in front of the barbel l. If a stronger grip is
needed, use a hook grip .
Place the hands on the bar slightly wider than shoulder -width
apart (this can vary depending on elbow and wrist mobility and
the front rack—catch position), outside of the knees, with the
elbows fully extended and pointing out to the side (i.e., arm is
internal ly rotated and the shoulder is r etracted).
Place the feet flat on the floor and position the bar
approximately 1 inch (3 cm) in front of the shins and over the
balls of the feet. The athlete ’s center of pressure on the floor
should be around the bottom shoelace, toward the front of the
mid-foot.
Position the body wi th the
back neutr al or sl ightly ar ched,
scapulae depr essed and r etracted,
chest held up and out, str ongly br aced,
head in line with the vertebr al column or slightly
hyperextended,
shoulders o ver or sl ightly in f ront of the bar , and
eyes focused str aight ahead or sl ightly upw ard.
All repetitions begin f rom this posi tion.
Upward Movement Phase: First Pull
Lift the bar off the floor by forcefully extending the hips and
knees, pushing into the floor
Keep the torso-to-floor angle  constant; do not let the hips rise
before the shoulders.
Maintain a neutr al spine posi tion.
Keep the elbows fully extended, pointing out to the side, and
the shoulders o ver or sl ightly ahead of the bar .
As the bar rises, k eep it as close to the shins as possible.
1069
The first pull ends when knees are maximal ly extended, and the
shins should be oriented v ertical ly (or near v ertical).
Note:  A comm on issue beginners can struggle with is allowing the
bar to pull the athlete’ s center of pressure on the floor forward
resulting in the bar’s trajectory moving away from the shin as the
athlete moves through the first pull. If this occurs, the athlete will
have to jump f orward to catch the bar .
Upward Movement Phase: Transition
As the bar rises just above the knees, extend the hips, while
moving the knees forward and under the bar, to transition the
athlete into the power posi tion.
Maintain bar contact wi th the thighs.
Keep the back neutral or slightly arched and the elbows fully
extended and pointing to the sides.
Note:  The transition phase is similar to the RDL; in fact, weightl ifters
use the RDL to str engthen this mo vement pat tern.
Upward Movement Phase: Second Pull
1070
Rapidly extend the hips, knees, and ankles culminating with a
shrug. (Note:  It is important that the heels stay in contact with
the floor for as long as possible in order to maximiz e force
transference to the barbel l.)
Keep the bar as close to the body as possible.
Keep the back neutr al and the elbows pointing out to the sides.
Keep the shoulders over the bar and the elbows extended as
long as possible.
When the lower body joints reach full extension, rapidly shrug
the shoulders upward with the elbows still fully extended and
pointing to the sides.
As the shoulde rs reach their highest elevation, flex the elbows
to begin pul ling the body under the bar .
Due to the explosiv e nature of this phase, the torso is erect or
slightly hyperextended, the head may tilt slightly back, and the
heels ma y lose contact wi th the floor .
Upward Movement Phase: Catch
After the hip and knee have fully extended, pull the body under
the bar and r otate the arms ar ound and under the bar .
Simul taneously , flex the hips and knees to a quarter -squat
position.
Once the arms are under the bar, lift the elbows to position the
upper arms par allel to the floor .
Rack the bar across the front of the clavicles and anterior
deltoids.
Catch the bar with a nearly erect torso, the shoulders slightly
ahead of the hips, a neutr al head posi tion, and flat f eet.
After gaining control and balance, stand up by extending the
hips and knees to a f ully erect posi tion.
Downward Movement Phase
Lower the elbows to unrack the bar from the anterior deltoids
and cla vicles, then slowly lower the bar down to the thighs.
1071
Simul taneously flex the hips and knees to cushion the impact of
the bar on the thighs.
Squat down with the elbows fully extended until the bar
touches the floor or drop the bar to the platform if rubber
bumper plates ar e being used.
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
gluteus maximus, semimembranosus, semitendinosus,
biceps femoris, vastus lateralis, vastus intermedius, vastus
medialis, rectus femoris, soleus, gastrocnemius, deltoids,
trapezius
VERBAL CUES
Squeeze the bar from the floor
Keep the arms long
Shrug vertically
COMMON ERRORS
Letting the barbell drift away from the body during the
first pull
Dropping the hips during the second pull
Flexing the elbows before completing the triple
extension
1072
   43  POWER SNATCH (AND HANG
POWER SNATCH VARIATION)
This exercise consists of quickly and forcefully pulling the bar from
the floor to a position overhead with the elbows fully extended.
Although the ascent consists of four phases (i.e., first pull, transition,
second pull, and catch), the upward movement of the bar occurs in
one continuous motion. While the power snatch can be initiated
from the floor, it can also be initiated from a hang position (i.e.,
power position or slightly above or below the knee). When a hang
power snatch is performed it is important to note that the bar is not
returned to the floor or rack between repetitions. Regardless of
where the power clean is initiated from, the bar is received in a
position wher e the top of the thighs ar e abo ve parallel.
Starting Position
Stand with the feet placed between hip- and shoulder -width
apart wi th the toes pointed sl ightly outw ard.
Squat down with the hips lower than the shoulders and grasp
the bar evenly with a pronated grip. If a stronger grip is
1073
needed, use a hook grip .
The grip width is wider than for other exercises; a way to
estimate it is to measur e and use one of these distances for
spacing the hands: the distan ce from the edge of the clenched
fist of one hand to the opposite shoulder when the arm is
straight out at the side, or the elbow -to-elbow distance when
the arms ar e straight out at the side.
Extend the elbows fully and point them out to the side (i.e., arm
is internal ly rotated, and the shoulder is r etracted).
Place the feet flat on the floor and position the bar
approximately 1 inch (3 cm) in front of the shins and over the
balls of the f eet.
Position the body wi th the
back neutr al or sl ightly ar ched,
scapulae depr essed and r etracted,
chest held up and out,
head in line with the vertebr al column or slightly
hyperextended,
feet flat on the floor ,
shoulders o ver or sl ightly in f ront of the bar , and
eyes focused str aight ahead or sl ightly upw ard.
All repetitions begin f rom this posi tion.
Upward Movement Phase: First Pull
Lift the bar off the floor by forcefully extending the hips and
knees.
Keep the torso-to-floor angle  constant; do not let the hips rise
before the shoulders.
Maintain the neutr al spine posi tion.
Keep the elbows fully extended, pointing out to the side, and
the shoulders o ver or sl ightly ahead of the bar .
As the bar is r aised, k eep it as close to the shins as possible.
1074
Upward Movement Phase: Transition
As the bar rises just above the knees, extend the hips while
moving the knees forward and under the bar (the “power
position”).
Maintain bar contact wi th the thighs.
Keep the back neutral or slightly arched and the elbows fully
extended and pointing to the sides.
Note:  The tr ansition phase is simi lar to the RDL.
Upward Movement Phase: Second Pull
Rapidly extend  the hips, knees, and ankles moving into an
aggressive shrug.
1075
Keep the bar close to the body, the back neutral, and the
elbows pointing out to the sides.
Keep the shoulders over the bar and the elbows extended as
long as possible.
When the lower body joints reach full extension, rapidly shrug
the shoulders with the elbow s still fully extended and pointing
to the sides.
As the shoulde rs reach their highest elevation, flex the elbows
to begin pul ling the body under the bar .
Due to the explosiv e nature of this phase, the torso is erect or
slightly hyperextended, the head may tilt slightly back, and the
heels ma y lose contact wi th the floor .
Upward Movement Phase: Catch
After the lower body has fully extended, pull the body under the
bar and r otate the hands ar ound and under the bar .
Simul taneously , flex the hips and knees to a quarter -squat
position.
Once the body is under the bar, catch the bar over and slightly
behind the ears with fully extended elbows, an erect and stable
torso, a neutral head position, flat feet, and the body’s weight
over the middle of the f eet.
After gaining control and balance, stand up by extending the
hips and knees to a fully erect position and stabilize the bar
overhead.
Downward Movement Phase
Lower the bar from the overhead position by gradual ly reducing
the muscular tension of the shoulders to allow a controlled
descent of the bar to the thighs.
Simul taneously flex the hips and knees to cushion the impact of
the bar on the thighs.
Squat down with the elbows fully extended until the bar
touches the floor or drop the bar to the platform if rubber
1076
bumper plates ar e being used.
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
gluteus maximus, semimembranosus, semitendinosus,
biceps femoris, vastus lateralis, vastus intermedius, vastus
medialis, rectus femoris, soleus, gastrocnemius, deltoids,
trapezius
VERBAL CUES
Squeeze the bar from the floor
Long arms during the pull
Punch your hands to the sky
COMMON ERRORS
Letting the bar drift forward away from the shin
Raising the hips too quickly as the bar is lifted from the
floor
Flexing the elbows prior to completing the triple
extension
1077
   44  CLEAN GRIP MID-THIGH PULL
(AND SNATCH GRIP VARIATION)
The performance of the mid-thigh pull with the clean or snatch grip
requires the use of lifting blocks or a rack that allows the loaded
barbel l to be positioned so that the athlete initiates the movement
from the power position (i.e., second pull position, knee angle ~125-
145 degrees and hip angle ~140-150 degrees). When using the
clean grip, the bar will generally be positioned across the upper
thigh, depending on the athlete’ s individual anthropometrics (i.e.,
arm length). If the snatch grip is used, the bar will gener ally be
higher on the thigh and in most instances sit across the hip crease
as a result of the wider grip. To accommodate the wider grip used
during the snatch grip mid-thigh pull, the loaded bar will need to be
placed on higher blocks (or rack position) than what is used with the
clean grip mid-thigh pull. While there are differences in the
placement of the barbel l between the clean and snatch grip variants
of this lift the fundamental movement patterns associated with
performing the mid-thigh pull are the same regardless of which grip
is used.
Starting Position
The power position is the starting position for the clean grip mid-
thigh pul l (and snatch grip mid-thigh pul l).
Stand with the feet placed between hip- and shoulder width
apart wi th the toes pointed sl ightly outw ard.
Grasp the bar with a clean grip (i.e., slightly wider than
shoulder -width apart) while using lifting straps with the elbows
fully extended and pointing outward (i.e., arms internally
rotated and the shoulder retracted). (If performing this exercise
with a snatch grip, grasp the bar with a wider grip based on the
grip establ ished f or the power snatch. )
Move into a position where the trunk is in an upright position
and there is a slight knee flex; the shoulder is above or slightly
1078
behind the barbel l and slack is r emoved from the body .
Note:  When performing the mid-th igh pull the bar should not be
placed at the mid-thigh position (i.e., midpoint betwee n the iliac
crest and the middle of the patella) because this will result in the
athlete being in the wrong position (e.g., excessiv e torso lean). Due
to the anthropometric differences (i.e., limb lengths)  between
athletes, the bar position will not be the same for all athletes. As
such the coach should ensur e that each athlete’ s individual ized
power posi tion is used when perf orming this l ift.
Upward Movement Phase
The upward movement phase mirrors the movements used when
performing the second pull in the power clean (or powe r snatch if
using a snatch grip).
Rapidly exten d the knees, hips, and ankles, (Note:  it is
important that the heels stay in contact with the floor for as
long as possible in order to maximiz e force transference to the
barbel l.)
Keep the bar as close to the body as possible.
Keep the back neutr al and the elbows pointing out to the sides.
Keep the shoulders over the bar and the elbows extended as
long as possible.
When the lower body joints reach full extension, rapidly shrug
the shoulders upwards with the elbows still fully extended and
pointing to the sides.
Downward Movement Phase
During the down ward movement phase, the barbel l is returned to
the blocks or rack and the starting position should be reestabl ished.
It is important that the start position is reestabl ished prior to each
repetition perf ormed in a giv en set.
In a controlled manner while maintaining an upright trunk
position lower the barbel l back to the starting posi tion.
While lowering the barbel l it is important that the trunk remains
rigid (i.e. , in a neutr al spine posi tion).
1079
Avoid bouncing the barbel l off the blocks.
Note:  The mid-thigh pull can be performed with loads greater than
the loads that are used when performing the power clean or power
snatch. In fact, it is not uncom mon for athletes to be able to perform
the mid-thigh pul ls with as much as 140% of the 1RM.
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
gluteus maximus, semimembranosus, semitendinosus,
biceps femoris, vastus lateralis, vastus intermedius, vastus
medialis, rectus femoris, soleus, gastrocnemius, deltoids,
trapezius
VERBAL CUES
Drive the f eet thr ough the floor
Stay on y our heels as long as possible
Shrug v ertical ly with long arms
COMMON ERRORS
Not maintaining a vertical trunk position resulting in the
hips being too high and the shoulder being placed in
front of the bar. ( Note:  often a result of initiating the lift
from the wrong position.)
Performing the shrug motion before completing the
triple extension of the lower body
Flexing the elbows before completing the triple
extension of the lower body
1080
   45  CLEAN PULL FROM KNEE-BLOCK
(AND SNATCH GRIP VARIATION)
The clean pull from the knee-block (and snatch grip variation) is an
exercise that is performed from a position that corresponds to the
end of the first pull during the performance of the power clean (or
power snatch). The start position corresponds to the end of the
down ward movement of the RDL ex ercise.
Starting Position
Position the blocks so that the loaded barbel l is at a heigh t that
corresponds to the athlete’ s patel lar tendon.
Stand with the feet placed between hip- to shoulder -width apart
with the toes pointed sl ightly outw ard.
Grasp the bar with a clean grip (i.e., slightly wider than
shoulder -width apart) while using lifting straps with the elbows
fully extended and pointing outward (i.e., arms internally
rotated and the shoulder retracted). (If performing this exercise
1081
with a snatch grip grasp the bar with a wider grip based  upon
the grip establ ished f or the power snatch. )
Hold the back in a normal lordotic position while slightly flexing
the knees and flexing at the hip so that the shoulder is in front
of the bar .
Ensur e that the shins are perpendicular to the ground and the
weight is center ed between the f eet.
Upward Movement Phase: Transition
As the bar rises just above the knees, extend the hips, while
moving the knees forward and under the bar, to transition the
athlete into the power posi tion.
Maintain bar contact wi th the thighs.
Keep the back neutral or slightly arched and the elbows fully
extended and pointing to the sides.
Note:  The transition phase is similar to the RDL; in fact, weightl ifters
use the RDL to str engthen this mo vement pat tern.
1082
Upward Movement Phase: Second Pull
Rapidly extend the hips, knees, and ankles, culminating with a
shrug. (Note:  It is important  that the heels stay in contact  with
the floor for as long as possible in order to maximiz e force
transference to the barbel l.)
Keep the bar as close to the body as possible.
Keep the back neutr al and the elbows pointing out to the sides.
Keep the shoulders over the bar and the elbows extended as
long as possible.
1083
When the lower body joints reach full extension, rapidly shrug
the shoulders upward with the elbows still fully extended and
pointing to the sides.
As the shoulde rs reach their highest elevation, flex the elbows
to begin pul ling the body under the bar .
Due to the explosiv e nature of this phase, the torso is erect or
slightly hyperextended, the head may tilt slightly back, and the
heels ma y lose contact wi th the floor .
Downward Movement Phase
During the down ward movement phase, the barbel l is returned to
the blocks or rack and the starting position should be reestabl ished.
It is important  that the start position is reestabl ished before each
repetition perf ormed in a giv en set.
Flex at the knee and hip while lowering the barbel l to the
blocks.
Maintain a neutral back and ensur e the elbows are pointing to
the sides.
Avoid bouncing the barbel l off the blocks.
Note:  The mid-thigh pull can be performed with loads greater than
the loads that are used when performing the power clean or power
snatch. In fact, it is not uncom mon for athletes to be able to perform
the mid-thigh pul ls with as much as 140% of the 1RM.
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
gluteus maximus, semimembranosus, semitendinosus,
biceps femoris, vastus lateralis, vastus intermedius, vastus
medialis, rectus femoris, soleus, gastrocnemius, deltoids,
trapezius
VERBAL CUES
Hips high and shoulder in front of the bar
Tight back
Shrug vertically with long arms
1084
COMMON ERRORS
Dropping the hips and moving the shoulder behind the
bar
Coming to the toes too soon
Rounding the back and not maintaining a normal lordotic
position
KEY TERMS
alternated grip
clean grip
closed grip
false grip
five-point body contact posi tion
forced repetitions
free weight ex ercises
grip width
1085
hook grip
liftoff
neutral grip
neutral spine
out-of-the-r ack ex ercises
overhand grip
over-the-f ace barbel l exercises
partner -assisted r eps
power ex ercises
pronated grip
range of motion (ROM)
snatch grip
spotter
sticking point
structur al exercises
supinated grip
supine
underhand grip
Valsalv a maneuv er
STUDY QUESTIONS
  1.  Which of the following grips is used for the lying triceps
extension ex ercise?
  a.  open, pr onated
  b.  open, al ternated
  c.  closed, pr onated
  d.  closed, al ternated
  2.  An athlete performing which of the following workouts has the
greatest need f or a weight bel t?
  a.  deadl ift at 90% of the 1RM
  b.  deadl ift at 50% of the 1RM
  c.  bench pr ess at 95% of the 1RM
  d.  power snatch at 70% of the 1RM
1086
  3.  Al l of the f ollowing r equire one or mor e spot ters ex cept:
  a.  power clean
  b.  shoulder pr ess
  c.  bench pr ess
  d.  back squat
  4.  When an athlete is performing the barbel l bench press
exercise, all of the following describe the actions of the spotter
except:
  a.  Stand er ect behind the bench wi th the f eet shoulder -width
apart.
  b.  Grasp the bar wi th a closed, al ternated grip inside the
athlete’ s hands.
  c.  Tell the athlete when the bar wi ll be lifted of f the supports.
  d.  B e sure the athlete has complete contr ol of the bar at the
conclusion of the l iftoff.
  5.  Which of the following describes the proper breathing
technique f or the shoulder pr ess ex ercise?
  a.  Exhale thr ough the sticking point on the upw ard
movement phase.
  b.  Inhale bef ore the sticking point on the upw ard movement
phase.
  c.  Exhale bef ore the sticking point on the down ward
movement phase.
  d.  Inhale thr ough the sticking point on the down ward
movement phase.
1087