# Section 16.1

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 16: Exercise Technique for Free Weight and Machine Training

**Section:** 16.1 -- Free Weight Exercises

**PDF Pages:** 947--990

CHAPTER  16
EXERCISE TECHNIQUE FOR
FREE WEIGHT AND MACHINE
TRAINING
Scott Caulfield, MA, Guy Hornsby, PhD, and G.
Gregory Haff, PhD
The authors would like to acknowl edge the significant contributions of Douglas
Berninger , Roger W . Earle, and Thomas R. B aechle to this chapter .
After completing this chapter, you will be able to
understand the gener al techniques in volved in pr operly
performing r esistance tr aining ex ercises;
provide br eathing guidel ines;
determine the appr opriateness of wearing a weight bel t;
provide r ecommendations f or spot ting free weight ex ercises;
teach pr oper r esistance tr aining ex ercise and spot ting
techniques; and
identi fy common err ors and fla ws in technique.
This chapter provides guidel ines and strategies for performing and
teaching safe and effective lifting and spotting techniques. At the
core of safe and effective resistance training is proper exercise
947
execution. Exercises that are performed and spotted correctly
promote injury -free results and do so in a time-ef ficient manner .
The first half of this chapter summariz es the fundamental
techniques involved in properly performing and spotting exercises
and using a weight belt during lifting. The last section provides
checkl ists and photogr aphs depicting proper resistance training
exercise and spotting techni ques. It is assumed that the reader is
familiar with these exercises. Therefore, the techniques  presented
are simply guidel ines that represent the most commonly accepted
method of performing the exercises. No attempt has been made to
describe all variations for properly executing and spotting the
exercises included in this chapter .
948
Fundamentals of Exercise Technique
Several commonal ities are observ ed among resistance training
exercise techniques. Most free weight and machine exercises involve
some sort of handgrip on a bar, dumbbel l, or handle, and absolutely
all exercises require an optimal body or limb position, movement
range and speed, and method of breathing. Additional ly, some
exercises may warrant the use of a weight belt and certain
procedur es for lifting a bar of f the floor .
Handgrips
Two common grips are used in resistance training exercises: (a) the
pronated grip, with palms down and knuckles up, also called the
overhand grip; and (b) the supinated grip, with palms up and
knuckles down , also known as the underhand grip (figure 16.1).
(A variation of either grip is the neutral grip, in which the knuckles
point laterally—as in a handshak e.) Two less common grips are the
alternated grip, in which one hand is in a pronated grip and the
other is in a supinated grip, and the hook grip, which is similar to
the pronated grip except that the thumb is positioned under the
index and middle fingers. The hook grip is typical ly used for
performing exercises that require a stronger grip (power exercises,
e.g., snatch). Note that the thumb is wrapped around the bar in all
of the grips shown; this positioning is called a closed grip. When
the thumb does not wrap around the bar, the grip is called an open
or false grip .
949
FIGURE 16.1 Bar grips: (a) pronated,  (b) supinated,  (c) alternated,  (d) hook (posterior
view), and  (e) false.
Establ ishing the proper grip in an exercise involves placing the
hands at the correct distance from each other (referred to as the
grip width ) and from the center of the bar (i.e., to maintain
balance). The three grip widths (figure 16.2) are common,  wide, and
narrow. For most exercises, the hands are placed approximately
shoulder -width apart. The hand positioning for all exercises should
950
result in a balanced, even bar. Weightl ifting exercises and their
variations use the clean grip or the snatch grip, depending upon
the exercise being performed. Both of these grips are pronated
closed hand positions. The clean grip is slightly wider than shoulder -
width apart, outside of the knees. The snatch grip is a wide grip and
can be determ ined using two types of measur ements: the fist-to-
opposi te-shoulder method and the elbow -to-elbow method (also
known as the scarecrow method); see page 469. Both the clean grip
and the snatch grip are often used with a hook grip (mentioned
previously) to assist in giving the athlete a str onger grip .
FIGURE 16.2  Grip widths.
Stable Body and Limb Positioning
Whether an exercise requires lifting a barbel l or dumbbel l from the
floor or pushing and pulling while one is positioned in or on a
machine, establ ishing a stable position is critical for safety and
optimal performance. A stable position enables the athlete to
maintain proper body alignment during an exercise, which in turn
places an appr opriate str ess on muscles and joints.
Exercises performed while standing typical ly require that the feet
be positioned slightly wider than hip width with the heels and balls
of the feet in contact with the floor. Establ ishing a stable position in
or on machine s sometimes requires adjusting the seat or resistance
arm and f astening bel ts snugly .
Seated or supine  (lying face up) exercises performed on a bench
require a specific postur e. The athlete should position the body to
achiev e a five-point body contact position :
1. Head is placed firmly on the bench or back pad.
951
2. Shoulders and upper back are placed firmly and evenly on the
bench or back pad.
3. Buttocks ar e placed ev enly on the bench or seat.
4. Right f oot is flat on the floor .
5. Left foot is flat on the floor .
Establ ishing and maintaining this five-point body contact position
at the beginning and throughout the movement phases promotes
maximal stabi lity and spinal support (2, 9, 10).
Exercises performed during standing typically require
that the feet be positioned slightly wider than hip width
with the heels and balls of the feet in contact with the
floor. Seated or supine exercises performed on a bench
usually require a five-point body contact position.
Cam-, pulley-, or lever-based  exercise machines that have an axis
of rotation require specific positioning of the athlete’ s body, arms, or
legs for reasons of safety and optimal execution. To align the
primary joint of the body involved in the exercise with the axis of the
machine, it may be necessar y to move the seat; the ankle or arm
roller pad; or the thigh, chest, or back pad. For example, adjust the
ankle roller pad (up or down) and the back pad (forward or
backw ard) to line up the knee joint with the machine axis before
performing the leg (knee) extension ex ercise.
Range of Motion and Speed
When the entire range of motion (ROM)  is covered during an
exercise, the value of the exercise is maximiz ed and flexibi lity is
maintained or improved. Ideally, an exercise’s full ROM should mimic
the full ROM of the involved joint or joints in order for the greatest
improvements to occur, but sometimes this is not possible (the knee
of the trailing leg during a lunge) or recommended (using
interv ertebr al joints during a squat).
952
Repetitions performed in a slow, controlled manner increase the
likelihood that full ROM can be reached. Howev er, when power or
quick-lift exercises (e.g., power clean, push jerk, and snatch) are
performed, an effort should be made to accelerate the bar to a
maximal speed while still maintaining control and proper form
throughout the ex ercise.
Breathing Considerations
The most strenuous movement of a repetition—t ypical ly soon after
the transition from the eccentric phase to the concentric phase—is
referred to as the sticking point . Strength and condi tioning
professionals should typical ly instruct athletes to exhale through the
sticking point and to inhale during the less stressful phase of the
repetition (3, 6, 7). For example, since the sticking point of the
biceps curl exercise occurs about midw ay through the upward
movement phase (concentric elbow flexion), the athlete should
exhale during this portion. Inhalation, then, should occur as the bar
is lowered back to the starting position. This breathing strategy
applies to most r esistance tr aining ex ercises.
Breath holding may be suggested in some situations, howev er. For
experienced resistance-tr ained athletes performing structural
exercises  (those that load the vertebr al column and therefore place
stress on it) with high loads, the Valsalva maneuver  can be
helpful for maintaining proper vertebr al alignment and support. As
explained in chapter 2, the Valsalv a maneuv er involves expiring
against a closed glottis, which, when combined with contracting the
abdomen and rib cage muscles, creates rigid compartme nts of fluid
in the lower torso and air in the upper torso (i.e., the “fluid ball”).
The advantage of the Valsalv a maneuv er is that it increases the
rigidity of the entire torso to aid in supporting the vertebr al column,
which in turn reduces the associated compr essive forces on the disks
during lifting (1, 4, 5, 8). It also helps to establ ish and maintain a
normal lordotic lumbar spine position (also called a neutral spine )
and erect upper torso position, described in the technique checkl ists
953
for certain exercises. Be aware, howev er, that the resulting increase
in intra-abdominal pressure has potential ly detrimental side effects,
such as dizziness, disorientation, excessiv ely high blood  pressure,
and blackouts. This is why the breath-holding phase is—and should
be—qui te transient, only about 1 to 2 seconds (at most). Even a
very well-trained individual should not extend the length of the
breath-holding phase, because blood pressure can quickly rise to
triple r esting lev els (7).
Strength and condi tioning professionals involved in condu cting 1-
repetition maximum (1RM) tests in, for example, the squat, deadl ift,
hip sled, leg press, shoulder press, or power clean need to be aware
of the advantages and disadv antages of coaching athletes in the
Valsalv a maneu ver. While it is obviously important that the vertebr al
column be internal ly supported during these movements for safety
and technique  reasons, it is recommended that an athlete not
extend the br eath-holding period.
For most exercises, exhale through the sticking point of
the concentric phase and inhale during the eccentric
phase. Exper ienced and well-trained athletes may want
to use the Valsalva maneuver when performing
structural exercises to assist in maintaining proper
vertebral alignment and support.
Weight Belts
The use of a weight belt may help maintain intra-abdominal pressure
during lifting (5, 7). Its appropriateness depends on the type of
exercise performed and the relative load lifted. It is recommended
that a weight belt be worn for exercises that place stress on the
lower back and during sets that use near-maximal or maximal loads.
Adopting this strategy may reduce the risk of lower back injury when
combined with proper lifting and spotting techniques. A drawback to
weight belt use is that wearing a belt too often reduces
opportuni ties for the abdominal and lower back muscles to be
954
trained. Furthermor e, no weight belt is needed for exercises that do
not stress the lower back (e.g., biceps curl or lat pulldown) or for
exercises that do stress the lower back (e.g., back squat or deadl ift)
but in volve the use of l ight loads.
Typically an athlete should wear a weight belt when
performing exercises that place stress on the lower back
and during sets that involve near-maximal or maximal
loads. A weight belt is not needed for exercises that do
not stress the lower back  or for those that do stress the
lower back but involve light loads.
955
Spotting Free W eight Exercises
A spotter  is some one who assists in the execution of an exercise to
help protect the athlete from injury . A spotter may also serve to
motiv ate the athlete and help in the completion of forced
repetitions  (also referred to as partner-assisted reps), but the
spotter’s primary responsibi lity is the safety of the athlete being
spotted. The spotter must realize that poor execution of this
responsibi lity may result in serious injury , not only to the athlete
being spotted but also to the spotter and other individua ls in close
proximity. Although partner -assisted actions are valuable in helping
an athlete benefi t from training, the importance of promoting safety
cannot be o veremphasiz ed.
The remainder of this section offers additional insight on when
and how to spot free weight  exercises. This information provides a
foundation for strength and condi tioning professionals to apply to
their speci fic training en vironment.
Types of Exercises Performed and
Equipment Involved
Free weight exercises  performed over the head (e.g., barbel l
shoulder press) or with the bar on the back (e.g., back squat),
racked anterio rly on the shoulders or on the clavicles (e.g., front
squat) or over the face (e.g., bench press or lying triceps extension),
are more challenging for the athlete to correctly execute than those
in which the bar or dumbbe lls are held or raised at the sides or in
front (e.g., lateral shoulder raise or barbel l biceps curl, respectiv ely)
and therefore should involve one or more spotters. The overhead,
bar-on-the-back or bar-on-the-f ront-shoulders and over-the-f ace
exercises (espe cially using dumbbel ls) also require more skill on the
part of the spotter and are potential ly the most danger ous to the
athlete. Spotting dumbbel l exercises typical ly requires more skill than
spotting barbe ll exercises because there is an additional piece of
956
equipment to observ e and spot. Power exerc ises should not be
spotted.
With the exception of power exercises, free weight
exercises performed with a bar moving over the head,
positioned on the back, racked on the front of the
shoulders, or passing over the face typically require one
or more spotters.
Spotting Overhead Exercises and Those With the Bar
on the Back or Front Shoulders
Ideally, to promote the safety of the athlete, the spotters, and others
nearb y, overhead exercises and those involving the bar on the back
or front shoulders should be performed inside a power rack with the
crossbars in place at an appropriate height. All plates, bars, locks,
and weight -plate trees must be cleared from the lifting area so they
cannot be tripped over or run into and cannot affect the movement
of the bar. Athletes who are not lifting should be instructed to stay
clear of the lifting area. Since the loads lifted in these exercises can
be considerable, to exert sufficient leverage the spotter or spotters
should be at least as strong and at least as tall as the athlete who is
lifting. Out-of-the-rack exercises  (e.g., forward step lunge or
step-up) with heavy weights can result in serious injury . These
exercises should be executed only by well-trained and skilled
athletes and spot ted by experienced pr ofessionals.
Spotting Over-the-Face Exercises
When spotting over-the-face barbell exercises , it is importa nt
for the spotter to grasp the bar with an alternated grip, usually
narrower than the athlete’ s grip. Since the spotter may be called on
to catch the bar or assist in lifting moder ate to heavy loads (usual ly
from a higher vantage point), establ ishing a solid, wide base of
support with the feet and a neutral spine position is critically
important.
957
For dumbbell exercises, it is important to spot as close to the
dumbbel ls as possible or, in a few exercises, to spot the dumbbel l
itself. Although some individuals advocate spotting dumbbel l
movements by placing the hands on the athlete’ s upper arms or
elbows (figure 16.3a), this techniq ue may lead to injury . If the
athlete’ s elbow s “collapse” (i.e., flex), the spotter will not be in a
position to stop the dumbb ells from striking the athlete’ s face or
chest. Spotting at the forearms near the wrists (figure 16.3b) is a
safer technique. Note that for some exercises (e.g., dumbbel l
pullover and overhead dumbbel l triceps extension), it is necessary to
spot wi th hands on the dumbbel l itself.
Do Not Spot Power Exercises
Whereas spotting is recommended in the types of exercises
previously described, it is not advised in power exercises. Instead of
spotting these exercises, the strength and condi tioning professional
needs to teach athletes how to get away from a bar that is
unmanageable. Spotting these types of exercises is too dangerous to
both the spotter and athlet e. Athletes should be instructed that
when they miss the bar in front, they should push the bar away or
simply drop it. They should be taught that if they lose the bar behind
the head, they should release it and jump forward. For these
reasons, the surrounding area or platform should be cleared of other
athletes and equipment bef ore such ex ercises ar e perf ormed.
958
FIGURE 16.3  (a) Incorrect dumbbel l spot ting location.  (b) Correct spot ting location.
Number of Spotters
The number of spotters needed is largely determined by the load
being lifted, the experience and ability of the athlete and spotters,
and the physical strength of the spotters. With heavier loads, the
likelihood and severity of an injury increase. Once the load exceeds
the spotter’s ability to effectively protect the athlete (and him- or
hersel f), another spotter must become involved. On the other hand,
one spotter is preferred if he or she can easily handle the load,
because two or more spotters must coordinate their actions with
those of the athlete. As the number of spotters increases, so does
the chance that an err or in timing or technique ma y occur.
Communication Between Athlete and
Spotter
Communication is the responsibi lity of both the spotter and the
athlete. Before beginning a set, the athlete should tell the spotter
how the bar will initially be handled, how many repetitions will be
performed, and when he or she is ready to move the bar into
position. If spotters do not have this information, they may take
959
control of the bar improperly , too soon, or too late and consequently
disrupt the ex ercise or injur e the athlete.
Use of a Liftoff
The term liftoff  refers to moving the bar from the upright supports
to a position in which the athlete can begin the exercise. Usual ly the
spotter helps place the barbel l or dumbbel ls into the athlete’ s hands
while the elbows are extended and helps to move the barbel l or
dumbbel ls to the proper starting position. Some athletes  may want
the spotter to provide a liftoff; others do not. If a liftoff is needed or
requested, the athlete and spotter need to agree in advance on a
verbal signal (e.g., the comm and “up” or “I will give it to you on the
count of three”). Typical ly, the athlete signals that he or she is
ready; the spotter says, “One, two, three,” and on “three” the bar is
moved into position. Liftoffs are normal ly used in the bench press
(off the supports), should er press (off the supports or the
shoulders), and squat ting exercises if the supports are too low and
nonadjustable. When two spotters are involved and the athlete
wants a liftoff, as with a bench press, one spotter should assist with
the liftoff and then quickly move to the end of the bar to spot (the
other spotter is already at the other end). The spotter providing the
liftoff must be sure that the athlete has complete control of the bar
at the conclusion of the liftoff. If two spotters are used, both should
help the athlete place the bar back onto the supports on completion
of the ex ercise.
Amount and Timing of Spotting Assistance
Knowing how much and when to help an athlete is an important
aspect of spotting, and it requires the spotter to be experienced in
proper spotting techniques. Most athletes typical ly need just enough
help to successfully complet e a repetition through a sticking point
(i.e., a partner -assisted action); other times they might need the
spotter to handle the entire load. At the first indication that a
repetition will be missed, the athlete should quickly ask or signal the
960
spotter (sometimes with just a grunt or sound) for help, and the
spotter needs to immediate ly attempt to provide the amount of
assistance needed. If the athlete cannot contribute anything to the
completion of the repetition, the athlete should immediat ely tell the
spotter to “take it” or use some other phrase agreed on before the
lift. Regardless of when or why the spotter is needed to assist, he or
she should take the bar—if possible—f rom the athlete quickly and
smoothly , trying to avoid abrupt changes in the amount of load
being handled by the athlete. The athlete should try to stay with the
bar until it is racked or placed safely on the floor. This helps to
protect both the spot ter and athlete f rom injury .
The spotting guidel ines provided in the exercise technique
checkl ists are appropriate for a typical training environment. Spotting
procedur es may vary when excessiv ely heavy loads are being used—
such as 1RM at tempts—because mor e spot ters ar e typical ly needed.
Guidelines f or Spotting
Certain exercises that require spotting (over the face or neck and on the back)
have a higher level of difficulty and thus warrant additional safety consider ations.
In any exercise wher e the potential f or injury might oc cur, spot ting should be used.
Spotting is necessary on skillful multijoint exercises that involve a barbel l or
dumbbel ls being lifted over the head, on the back, on the front of the
shoulders, or o ver the f ace.
Exercises done overhead and with a bar racked on the back or in front of the
shoulders may require more than one spotter, and multiple spotters must be
taught how and wher e to spot the ex ercise.
Spotting over-the-f ace exercises requires the spotter to grasp the implement
being lifted or the athlete’ s wrists. Spotters must be trained to grasp the
implement properly and even assist athletes in reracking the bar or returning
dumbbel ls to the start position in case an exercise becomes too difficult to
complete saf ely on their own.
Power exercises are not spotted due to the safety factors for the athlete and
the spotter or spotters, and athletes should be taught how to miss properly
when learning these ex ercises.
Determining the number of spotters for certain exercises depends on a
number of factors, especial ly the amount of load being used, because the
likelihood of injury can incr ease gr eatly wi th hea vier loads.
961
Both spotters and athletes must communicate properly before beginning an
exercise requiring increased safety. They both must take part in this
communication and be clear as to what exercise is being performed and how
many repetitions. Therefore, communic ating on exercises that require a liftoff
is critical to saf ety in these ex ercises.
The liftoff requires a spotter to assist the athlete in getting the implement to
the proper position before beginning the exercise and can require multiple
spotters, depending on the ex ercise.
The spotting guidel ines provided in this chapter should be a fundamental part of
any strength and condi tioning professional’ s training. Safety of athletes in the
weight room is the most important part of supervising and conducting proper
training programs and providing the best and safest atmospher e for athletes  to be
successful in tr aining.
962
Conclusion
It is critically important that the strength and condi tioning
professional provide athletes with proper instruction in resistance
training exercise technique, including the fundamentals of breathing
and weight belt use. Additional ly, the strength and condi tioning
professional needs to teach athletes how and when exercises should
be spotted. Combined with quality supervision and ongoing
feedback, this attention to proper instruction results in a safe
training environment and an effective and appropriate training
stimulus.
RESISTANCE TRAINING EXERCISES
Videos f or exercises identi fied b y this icon 
  can be f ound in
HKPropel.
ABDOMEN
  1  Bent-Knee Si t-Up  418
  2  Abdominal Crunch   418
  3  Abdominal Crunch (Machine)   419
BACK
   4  Bent-Over Row  420
  5  Pendla y Row  421
  6  One-Arm Dumbbel l Row  422
   7  Lat Pul ldown (Machine)   423
   8  Seated R ow (Machine)   424
   9  Low-Pulley Seated R ow (Machine)   425
BICEPS
 10  Barbell Biceps Curl   426
11  Hammer Curl   427
963
CALVES
12  Standing Cal f (Heel) R aise (Machine)   428
13  Seated Cal f (Heel) R aise (Machine)   429
CHEST
 14  Flat B arbell Bench Pr ess (and Dumbbel l Variation)   430
15  Incline Dumbbel l Bench Pr ess (and B arbell Variation)   432
 16  Flat Dumbbel l Fly (and I ncline Variation)   433
 17  Vertical Chest Pr ess (Machine)   434
18  Pec Deck (Machine)   435
FOREARMS
19  Wrist Curl   436
20  Wrist Extension   437
HIPS AND THIGHS
 21  Hip Sled (Machine)   438
 22  Back S quat   439
 23  Front Squat   441
 24  Zercher S quat   443
 25  Forward Step Lunge   445
26  Reverse Step Lunge in Fr ont R ack Position  447
27  Step-Up   449
28  Good Morning   451
29  Deadl ift  452
30  Stiff-Leg Deadl ift  453
31  Romanian Deadl ift (RDL) (and Snatch Grip V ariation)   454
 32  Leg (Knee) Extension (Machine)   455
 33  Seated Leg (Knee) Curl (Machine)   456
SHOULDERS
964
 34  Shoulder Pr ess (Machine)   457
 35  Seated B arbell Shoulder Pr ess (and Dumbbel l Variation)   458
36  Upright R ow  459
37  Lateral Shoulder R aise  460
TRICEPS
 38  Lying B arbell Triceps Extension   461
 39  Triceps Pushdown (Machine)   462
POWER EXERCISES
 40  Push Pr ess  463
 41  Push Jerk   465
 42  Power Clean (and Hang P ower Clean V ariation)   467
 43  Power Snatch (and Hang P ower Snatch V ariation)   469
 44  Clean Grip Mid- Thigh Pul l (and Snatch Grip V ariation)   471
 45  Clean Pul l from Knee-B lock (and Snatch Grip V ariation)   473
Abdomen
  1  BENT-KNEE SIT-UP
Starting Position
Lie in a supine posi tion on a floor mat.
Flex the knees to bring the heels near the but tocks.
Fold the arms acr oss the chest or abdomen.
All repetitions begin f rom this posi tion.
Upward Movement Phase
Flex the neck to mo ve the chin tow ard the chest.
Keeping the feet, buttocks, and lower back neutral and
stationary on the mat, curl the torso toward the thighs until the
upper back is of f the mat.
965
Downward Movement Phase
Uncurl the torso back to the starting posi tion.
Keep the feet, buttocks, lower back, and arms in the same
position.
MAJOR MUSCLE INVOLVED
rectus abdominis
VERBAL CUES
Curl torso toward thighs
Maintain feet on the floor
COMMON ERRORS
Not keeping the feet flat on the floor throughout the
movement
Not lowering the back fully to the ground
966
  2  ABDOMINAL CRUNCH
Starting Position
Lie in a supine posi tion on a floor mat.
Place the heels on a bench with the hips and knees flexed to
about 90 degr ees.
Fold the arms acr oss the chest or abdomen.
All repetitions begin f rom this posi tion.
Upward Movement Phase
Flex the neck to mo ve the chin tow ard the chest.
Keeping the buttocks and lower back neutral and stationary on
the mat, curl the torso toward the thighs until the upper back is
off the mat.
Downward Movement Phase
Uncurl the torso back to the starting posi tion.
Keep the feet, buttocks, lower back, and arms in the same
position.
MAJOR MUSCLE INVOLVED
rectus abdominis
VERBAL CUES
Curl shoulders off floor
Curl shoulders toward thighs
COMMON ERRORS
Raising the heels off the bench during the upward
movement phase
Raising the hips off the floor during the downward
movement phase
967
  3  ABDOMINAL CRUNCH (MACHINE)
Starting Position
Sit down on the machine and press the back firmly against the
back pad.
Place the f eet on the floor and the legs behind the r oller pads.
Position the legs par allel to each other .
Reach back and grasp the handles with a closed, neutral grip
with the back of the upper arms pr essed against the arm pads.
All repetitions begin f rom this posi tion.
Forward Movement Phase
Keeping the buttocks on the seat and the legs stationary , curl
the torso f orward tow ard the thighs.
Backward Movement Phase
Uncurl the torso back to the starting posi tion.
968
Keep the feet, buttocks, lower back, and arms in the same
position.
MAJOR MUSCLE INVOLVED
rectus abdominis
VERBAL CUES
Curl shoulders toward thighs
Maintain contact with the seat
COMMON ERRORS
Raising the buttocks off the seat during the movement
Overemphasizing a pull with the legs or hands to help
curl the torso
Back
   4  BENT-OVER ROW
969
Before Beginning
Grasp the bar wi th a closed, pr onated grip .
Grip should be wider than shoulder -width.
Lift the bar from the floor as described for the deadl ift exercise.
Use a pr onated grip , not an al ternated grip .
Starting Position
Position the feet in a shoulder -width stance with the knees
slightly flex ed.
Flex forward at the hips so the torso is slightly above parallel to
the floor .
Create a neutr al spine posi tion.
Focus the ey es a short distance ahead of the f eet.
Allow the bar to hang wi th the elbows f ully extended.
All repetitions begin f rom this posi tion.
Upward Movement Phase
Pull the bar tow ard the torso .
Keep the torso rigid, back neutr al, and knees sl ightly flex ed.
Do not jerk the torso upw ard.
Touch the bar to the lower chest or upper abdomen.
Downward Movement Phase
Lower the bar back to the starting posi tion.
Maintain the neutral spine and stationary torso and knee
positions.
At the end of the set, flex the hips and knees to place the bar
on the floor and stand up .
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
latissimus dorsi, teres major, middle trapezius, rhomboids,
posterior deltoids
VERBAL CUES
Maintain a flat back (neutral spine)
970
Focus on a point ahead of your toes
Squeeze a pencil between your shoulder blades
COMMON ERRORS
Jerking the upper body, extending the torso, locking out
the knees, curling bar in the hands, or rising on the toes
to help move the bar toward the upper abdomen
Allowing the upper back to round (losing the neutral
spine position) during the movement
  5  PENDLAY ROW
Starting Position
Position the feet in a shoulder -width stance with the knees
slightly flex ed and the barbel l in front.
Flex at the hips and knees to lower the torso until it is parallel
to the floor .
Grasp the bar wi th a closed, pr onated grip .
Grip should be wider than shoulder width.
971
Create a neutr al spine posi tion.
Focus the ey es on the floor a short distance ahead of the f eet.
Allow the bar to rest on the floor with the elbows  fully
extended.
All repetitions begin f rom this posi tion.
Upward Movement Phase
Pull the bar tow ard the torso .
Keep the torso rigid, with back neutral and parallel to the floor
and the knees sl ightly flex ed.
Do not jerk the torso upw ard.
Touch the bar to the lower chest or upper abdomen.
Downward Movement Phase
Lower the bar back to the starting posi tion.
Maintain the neutral spine, parallel torso, and flexed hip and
knee posi tions.
At the end of the set, place the bar on the floor and stand up .
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
latissimus dorsi, teres major, middle trapezius, rhomboids,
posterior deltoids
VERBAL CUES
Elbows high and wide
Reset on each rep
Hips back, not up
COMMON ERRORS
Allowing the upper back to round (losing the neutral
spine position) during the movement
Not maintaining a torso position that is parallel to the
floor
972
  6  ONE-ARM DUMBBELL ROW
Starting Position
Position the feet in a shoulder -width stance with the knees
slightly flex ed.
Flex forward at the hips so the torso is slightly above parallel to
the floor .
Create a neutr al spine posi tion.
Grasp the dumbbel l with a closed, neutr al grip .
Place the opposi te hand on the bench f or support.
Allow the dumbbel l to hang wi th the elbow f ully extended.
All repetitions begin f rom this posi tion.
Upward Movement Phase
Pull the dumbbel l toward the torso, keeping the elbow close to
the body .
Keep the torso rigid, back neutr al, and knees sl ightly flex ed.
Touch the dumbbel l to the side of the torso .
Downward Movement Phase
973
Lower the dumbbel l back to the starting posi tion.
Maintain the neutral spine and stationary torso and flexed knee
positions.
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
latissimus dorsi, teres major, middle trapezius, rhomboids,
posterior deltoids
VERBAL CUES
Lead with the elbow
Pull toward the hip pocket
Full stretch at the bottom of the movement
COMMON ERRORS
Rounding the back and not maintaining a neutral spine
Not fully extending the arm in the downward movement
phase
   7  LAT PULLDOWN (MACHINE)
974
Starting Position
Grasp the bar wi th a closed, pr onated grip .
Grip should be wider than shoulder width.
Sit down on the seat f acing the machine.
Position the thighs under the pads with the feet flat on the floor.
If necessary , adjust the seat and thigh pad.
Lean the torso sl ightly backw ard.
Extend the elbows f ully.
All repetitions begin f rom this posi tion.
Downward Movement Phase
Pull the bar down and tow ard the upper chest.
Maintain the slight torso backw ard lean; do not jerk the torso
backw ard.
Touch the bar to the cla vicle and upper chest ar ea.
Upward Movement Phase
Allow the elbows to slowly extend back to the starting posi tion.
Keep the torso in the same posi tion.
At the end of the set, stand up and return the bar to its resting
position.
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
latissimus dorsi, teres major, middle trapezius, rhomboids,
posterior deltoids
VERBAL CUES
Chest up, shoulders back
Lead with your elbows
Full stretch at the top
COMMON ERRORS
Excessive backward lean and failure to maintain a
neutral spine
975
Pulling the bar down behind the head to the back of the
neck
   8  SEATED ROW (MACHINE)
Starting Position
Sit erect with the feet flat on the platform and press the torso
against the chest pad.
Grasp the handles with a closed grip, either pronated or neutral.
If necessary , adjust the seat height to position the arms
approximately par allel to the floor .
Allow the elbows to extend f ully.
All repetitions begin f rom this posi tion.
976
Backward Movement Phase
Pull the handles tow ard the chest or upper abdomen.
Maintain an erect torso position and keep the elbows next to
the torso .
Pull the handles as f ar back as possible.
Do not jerk the torso backw ard.
Forward Movement Phase
Allow the handles to move forward, back to the starting
position.
Keep the torso in the same posi tion.
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
latissimus dorsi, teres major, middle trapezius, rhomboids,
posterior deltoids
VERBAL CUES
Sit tall
Pull with your elbows
Full stretch at the start
COMMON ERRORS
Moving the chest off the pad
Lifting the feet off the ground or not bracing against the
footrests if available
977
   9  LOW-PULLEY SEATED ROW
(MACHINE)
Starting Position
Sit on the long seat pad (or on the floor if the seat pad is not
available) and place the feet on the foot supports or the
machine f rame.
Grasp the handles wi th a closed grip , either neutr al or pr onated.
Sit in an erect position with the torso perpendicular to the floor,
knees slightly flexed, and the feet and legs parallel to each
other.
Allow the elbows to fully extend with the arms approximately
parallel to the floor .
All repetitions begin f rom this posi tion.
Backward Movement Phase
Pull the handles tow ard the abdomen.
Maintain an erect torso position with the knees in the same
slightly flex ed posi tion. Do not jerk the upper body or lean back.
978
Continue pul ling unti l the handles touch the abdomen.
Forward Movement Phase
Allow the elbows to slowly extend back to the starting posi tion.
Maintain an erect torso position with the knees in the same
slightly flex ed posi tion.
At the end of the set, flex the knees and hips to return the
weight to i ts resting posi tion.
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
latissimus dorsi, teres major, middle trapezius, rhomboids,
posterior deltoids
VERBAL CUES
Sit tall and keep your chest up
Full stretch at the start
Pull handles to your belly button
COMMON ERRORS
Jerking the upper body or leaning back during the
backward movement phase
Flexing the torso forward during the forward phase
979
Biceps
   10  BARBELL BICEPS CURL
Starting Position
Grasp the bar wi th a closed, supinated grip .
Grip should be shoulder width so the arms touch the sides of
the torso .
Stand erect with the feet shoulder -width apart and the knees
slightly flex ed.
Rest the bar on the front of the thighs with the elbows fully
extended.
All repetitions begin f rom this posi tion.
Upward Movement Phase
Flex the elbows unti l the bar is near the anterior del toids.
Keep the torso er ect and the upper arms stationary .
Do not jerk the body or swing the bar upw ard.
Downward Movement Phase
Lower the bar unti l the elbows ar e fully extended.
980
Keep the torso and knees in the same posi tion.
Do not bounce the bar on the thighs between r epetitions.
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
biceps brachii, brachialis, brachioradialis
VERBAL CUES
Pin your elbows to your sides
Curl through the full range
Control the descent
COMMON ERRORS
Jerking the upper body, shrugging the shoulders,
extending the torso, extending the knees, swinging the
bar, or rising on the toes to help raise the bar
Keeping the elbows partially flexed at the end of the
downward movement phase (shortening the ROM)
981
  11  HAMMER CURL
Starting Position
Grasp two dumbbel ls using a closed, neutr al grip .
Stand erect with the feet shoulder -width apart and the knees
slightly flex ed.
Position the dumbbel ls alongside the thighs with the elbows
fully extended.
All repetitions begin f rom this posi tion.
Upward Movement Phase
Keeping the dumbbel l in a neutral grip, flex the elbow of one
arm until the dumbbel l is near the anterior deltoid. The other
arm should be k ept stationary at the side of the thigh.
Keep the torso er ect and the upper arm stationary .
Do not jerk the body or swing the dumbbel l upw ard.
982
Downward Movement Phase
Lower the dumbbel l until the elbow is f ully extended.
Keep the dumbbel l in a neutr al grip posi tion.
Keep the torso and knees in the same posi tion.
Repeat the upward and down ward movement phases with the
other arm (al ternate arms).
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
brachialis, biceps brachii, brachioradialis
VERBAL CUES
Curl up, thumbs to shoulders
Control the descent; imagine crushing something
between your biceps and forearm
COMMON ERRORS
Swinging the body or using a rocking motion instead of a
controlled motion
Not using a full ROM by not lowering the weight fully or
not curling the weight high enough
983
Calves
  12  STANDING CALF (HEEL) RAISE
(MACHINE)
Starting Position
Position the body ev enly under the shoulder pads.
Grasp the handles and place the balls of the feet on the nearest
edge of the step with the legs and feet hip-width apart and
parallel to each other .
Stand erect with the knees fully extended but not forcefully
locked out.
Allow the heels to lower to a comf ortable, str etched posi tion.
All repetitions begin f rom this posi tion.
Upward Movement Phase
984
Keeping the torso erect and the legs and feet parallel, push up
as high as possible on the toes.
Push up of f the step; do not in vert or ev ert the f eet.
Keep the knees extended but not lock ed out.
Downward Movement Phase
Allow the heels to lower slowly back to the starting posi tion.
Maintain the same body posi tion.
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
gastrocnemius, soleus
VERBAL CUES
Push through your toes
Reach for the ceiling
Control the descent
COMMON ERRORS
Insufficient ROM
Significant knee flexion
985
  13  SEATED CALF (HEEL) RAISE
(MACHINE)
Starting Position
Sit erect on the seat and place the balls of the feet on the
nearest edge of the step with the legs and feet hip-width apart
and par allel to each other .
Lower the thigh–knee pad so it firmly presses against the knees
and front of the lower thigh ar ea.
Plantar flex the ankles to r emove the supports.
Allow the heels to lower to a comf ortable, str etched posi tion.
All repetitions begin f rom this posi tion.
Upward Movement Phase
986
Keeping the torso erect and the legs and feet parallel, push up
on the toes as high as possible.
Push up of f the step; do not in vert or ev ert the f eet.
Downward Movement Phase
Allow the heels to lower slowly back to the starting posi tion.
Maintain the same body posi tion.
At the end of the set, return the supports to the starting
position and r emove the f eet.
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
soleus, gastrocnemius
VERBAL CUES
Push through your toes
Squeeze at the top
Control the descent
COMMON ERRORS
Pulling with the hands or jerking the torso to help raise
the weight
Bouncing at the bottom of the movement instead of
performing controlled repetitions
987
Chest
   14  FLAT BARBELL BENCH PRESS
(AND DUMBBELL VARIATION)
This exercise can also be performed with two dumbbel ls, using a
closed, pronate d grip. When using dumbbel ls, the spotter assists by
spotting the athlete’ s forearms near the wrists instead of the bar .
Starting Position: Athlete
Lie in a supine position on a bench in the five-point  body
contact posi tion.
Place the body on the bench so that the eyes are below the
racked bar .
Grasp the bar with a closed,  pronated grip slightly wider than
shoulder -width apart.
988
Signal the spotter for assistance in moving the bar off the
supports.
Position the bar o ver the chest wi th the elbows f ully extended.
All repetitions begin f rom this posi tion.
Starting Position: Spotter
Stand erect and very close to the head of the bench (but do not
distract the athlete).
Place the feet shoulder -width apart with the knees slightly
flexed.
Grasp the bar with a closed, alternated grip inside the athlete’ s
hands.
At the athlete’ s signal, assist with moving the bar off the
supports.
Guide the bar to a posi tion o ver the athlete’ s chest.
Release the bar smoothly .
Downward Movement Phase: Athlete
Lower the bar to touch the chest at appr oximately nipple lev el.
Keep the wrists stiff and the forearms perpendicular to the floor
and par allel to each other .
Maintain the fiv e-point body contact posi tion.
Downward Movement Phase: Spotter
Keep the hands in the alternated grip position close to—but not
touching—the bar as i t descends.
Slightly flex the knees, hips, and torso and keep the back
neutral when f ollowing the bar .
Upward Movement Phase: Athlete
Push the bar upward and very slightly backw ard until the
elbows ar e fully extended.
Keep the wrists stiff and the forearms perpendicular to the floor
and par allel to each other .
Maintain the fiv e-point body contact posi tion.
989
Do not ar ch the back or r aise the chest to meet the bar .
At the end of the set, signal the spotter for assistance in racking
the bar .
Keep a grip on the bar unti l it is racked.
Upward Movement Phase: Spotter
Keep the hands in the alternated grip position close to—but not
touching—the bar as i t ascends.
Slightly extend  the knees, hips, and torso and keep the back
neutral when f ollowing the bar .
At the athlete’ s signal, grasp the bar with an alternate d grip
inside the athlete’ s hands.
Guide the bar back onto the supports.
Keep a grip on the bar unti l it is racked.
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
pectoralis major, anterior deltoids, triceps brachii
VERBAL CUES
Push yourself away from the bar
Try to bend the bar; touch and go
COMMON ERRORS
Bouncing the bar off the chest during the upward
movement phase
Lifting the hips off the bench
Not wrapping the thumbs around the barbell
990