# Section 17.4

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 17: Alternative Modes and Nontraditional Implement Training

**Section:** 17.4 -- Nontraditional Implements

**PDF Pages:** 1146--1165

  8  STABILITY BALL JACKKNIFE
Starting Position
Kneel down in f ront of a stabi lity ball.
Position the body f acing a way from the bal l.
In a quadruped position with the hands underneath the
shoulders and the knees extended, place both feet on the
stability ball.
Isometrical ly hold the torso in a rigid position with the elbows
fully extended and the head in a neutr al posi tion.
All repetitions begin f rom this posi tion.
Forward Movement Phase
Keeping the knees and elbow s fully extended and the torso in a
rigid position, begin the exercise by raising the hips slightly and
flexing the hips and knees to r oll the bal l toward the chest.
Continue rolling the ball forward until the hips and knees are
fully flex ed.
Keep the shoulders over the hands and the head in a neutral
position.
Backward Movement Phase
Return to the starting position by allowing the hips and knees to
extend under contr ol.
Keep the elbows f ully extended and the torso held rigid.
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
rectus abdominis, iliopsoas
1146
Strongman Exercises
  9  TIRE FLIP
Starting Position
Begin f acing the tir e with the f eet hip- to shoulder -width apart.
Squat down and lean into the tire so that the chin and the
anterior deltoids are resting on the tire and the feet are
positioned back f ar enough to maintain a neutr al spine posi tion.
Keeping the arms outside the knees and the elbows fully
extended, gr asp the tir e with a supinated grip .
All repetitions begin f rom this posi tion.
Upward Movement Phase
Begin by extending the knees and hips and plantar flexing the
ankles whi le pushing the tir e forward.
Move forward explosiv ely toward the tire by taking two or three
steps.
Continue this movement until the body is aligned in a 45-degr ee
angle to the tir e.
Consider flexin g the hip and knee of one leg fully to drive the
knee upw ard and tow ard the tir e.
Immediately after striking the tire with the thigh (if done),
reorient the hands into a pr onated grip .
1147
Lean forward and take small steps as required while forcefully
extending the arms to push the tir e over in f ront of the body .
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
gluteus maximus, semimembranosus, semitendinosus,
biceps femoris, vastus lateralis, vastus intermedius, vastus
medialis, rectus femoris, soleus, gastrocnemius, deltoids,
triceps brachii, trapezius
  10  LOG CLEAN AND PRESS
This exercise comes from strongman training and consists  of quickly
and forcefully picking the log up from the ground to the front of the
shoulders and then pressing  it overhead. The log clean consists of
three phases but occurs in two motions, with a pause of the log at
1148
the shoulders. The log can either be cleaned and pressed each
repetition or cleaned once and pr essed f or mul tiple r epetitions.
Starting Position
Stand with the feet placed between hip- and shoulder -width
apart wi th the toes pointed f orward or sl ightly outw ard.
Squat down with the hips lower than the shoulders, and grasp
the log wi th a closed, neutr al grip .
Place the hands on the log handles with the arms slightly
outside of the knees and the elbows f ully extended.
Place the feet flat on the floor, and position the log in front of
the shins and o ver the bal ls of the f eet.
All repetitions begin with the back in a neutral spine position,
scapulae depressed and retracted, head in line with the
vertebr al column, and should ers over or slightly in front of the
log.
Upward Movement Phase: First Pull
Lift the log of f the gr ound b y extending the hips and knees.
Keep the torso-to-floor angle  constant; do not let the hips rise
before the shoulders.
Keep the elbows extended and the shoulders over or slightly
ahead of the log.
Upward Movement Phase: Transition
As the log passes the knees, pull the log into the body by
dropping into a full squat position while ensuring the elbows are
about shoulder height and positioned slightly behind or above
the hands.
Briefly pause in this posi tion wi th the log on the thighs.
Upward Movement Phase: Second Pull
Forcefully jump upward by extending the hips and knees and
plantar flexing the ankles.
1149
Ensur e the log is kept close to the body throughout this phase,
whereby it essential ly rolls up the upper body toward the
shoulders.
Upward Movement Phase: Catch
After the lower body has fully extended, pull the body under the
log and rotate the arms around under the log, similar to the
catch in the power clean.
Simul taneously flex the hips and knees to a quarter - or half-
squat posi tion.
Rack the log across the front of the clavicles and anterior
deltoids.
Preparation Phase: Dip
Flex the hips and knees at a slow to moder ate speed to move
the log in a str aight path down ward.
Continue the dip to a depth not to ex ceed a quarter squat.
Keep the feet flat on the floor, the torso erect, and the upper
arms dir ectly under the log.
Upward Movement Phase: Drive
Immediately on reaching the lowest position of the dip, reverse
the movement by forcefully and quickly extending the hips and
knees and then the elbows to mo ve the log o verhead.
Downward Movement Phase
Lower the log by gradual ly reducing the muscular tension of the
arms to al low a contr olled descent of the log to the shoulders.
Simul taneously flex the hips and knees to cushion the impact of
the log on the shoulders, and then return the log to the floor. If
sufficient drop pads are available, it is possible to drop the log
from overhead to the floor. In order to do this safely, push the
bar slightly forward from the finished overhead position while
retaining some grip on the handles f or a part of the descent.
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
1150
gluteus maximus, semimembranosus, semitendinosus,
biceps femoris, vastus lateralis, vastus intermedius, vastus
medialis, rectus femoris, deltoids, triceps brachii, trapezius
  11  YOKE WALK
Starting Position
Adjust the yoke to a height that would provide sufficient
clearance to walk safely without tripping over it (perhaps 4-6 in.
[10-15 cm] of gr ound clear ance).
1151
Assume a position under the yoke with the bar positioned on
top of the upper trapezius muscles, with the feet positioned
underneath the hips and the rest of the body symmet rically
positioned under the frame. This should look something similar
to the starting position of a partial barbel l back squat, except
that the hands are positioned  on the vertical bars around lower
chest height.
Liftoff and Walking Phase
After strongly bracing the spine, forcibly push the feet into the
ground while pushing the elbows and hands forward into the
vertical bars to bet ter stabi lize the y oke.
While continuing to brace the spine and push the elbows and
hands forward, adopt a walking movement pattern in which the
spine remains vertical; initially focus on performing a series of
short and r elatively fast steps.
While accelerating, increase the length of steps and further
reduce gr ound contact times.
Ending Position
After completing the set distance, flex the hips, knees, and
ankles to lower the f rame car efully to the gr ound.
Maintain a strong braced spinal position to minimiz e the risk of
impact injury .
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
gastrocnemius, soleus, gluteus maximus, rectus femoris,
gluteus medius, erector spinae, internal and external
obliques
  12  SANDBAG CARRY
Starting Position
Adopt a position just behind the center of the sandbag, similar
to the starting posi tion of a barbel l deadl ift.
1152
The sandbag can be positioned length ways in the intended
direction of the carry or positioned across the body. Due to the
width of the sandbag, it may be necessary to rotate the hips
outward, with the elbows inside the knees.
Wedge the fingers under the sides of the sandbag so that the
hands act as hooks under each side of the sandbag.
Liftoff Position
After strongly bracing the spine and ensuring a strong grip on
the sandbag, forcibly push the feet into the ground and row the
sandbag into y our chest.
If the sandbag is quite heavy, transition into a full squat
position. Howe ver, if the sandbag is light to moder ately heavy, it
may be possible to bypass  the full squat position and, via
forceful hip extension, stand up from this position and initiate
the carrying phase.
Full Squat Position
As the sandbag approaches the chest at the end of the liftoff
phase, drop the hips rapidly into a deep squat position so that
the sandbag is tightly held against the chest and resting on the
upper thighs.
Once secur e and balanced in this position, initiate the
concentric phase of the squat movement by vigorously
extending the hip and knee joints while continuing to strongly
pull the sandbag into the chest.
Arms may be kept on the side of or above the sandbag,
depending on personal pr eference.
Carrying Phase
From here, adopt a walking movement pattern, initially focusing
on performing a series of short, fast steps, which will increase
total body balance and stabi lity.
When building up speed, increase the length of the steps and
further r educe gr ound contact times.
1153
Note:  Lean back a little during the walking phase so as not to lose
balance forward due to the sandbag positioned in front of the center
of mass.
Ending Position
After completing the set distance, lean slightly forward and drop
the sandbag to the floor .
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
gastrocnemius, soleus, gluteus maximus, rectus femoris,
gluteus medius, erector spinae, internal and external
obliques
  13  ZERCHER CARRY
Starting Position and Liftoff
The Z ercher carry can begin f rom one of two posi tions.
1. Starting posi tion from bo xes
1154
Position the barbel l on some boxes, anywher e from a full
squat posi tion to standing almost completely upright.
Position the arms under and around the bar with the palms
facing up so that the bar now rests on the inner part of the
elbows and is held closer the upper abdominal region. It
might be easier to maintain  this position by clasping the
hands and k eeping them close to the chest (not shown).
2. Starting posi tion from the floor
Position the barbel l on the floor near the shins with a closed
overhand grip and then perf orm a semi-sumo squat deadl ift.
Once the bar is above the knees, drop into a full semi-sum o
squat position and reposition the arms under and through
the bar so that the bar is on the inner part of the elbows
and contacting the upper abdominal r egion.
While maintaining the position of the bar on the inner elbows and
upper abdomin als, forcibly push the feet into the ground and extend
the knees and hips, now standing upright with the bar kept in the
same r elative posi tion as l iftoff.
Walking Phase
Adopt a walking movemen t pattern, initially focusin g on
performing a series of short, relatively fast steps, which will
increase total body balance and stabi lity.
When building up speed, increase the length of the steps and
further r educe gr ound contact times.
Note:  Lean back a little during the walking phase so as not to lose
balance forward due to the barbell positioned in front of the center
of mass.
Ending Position
After completing the set distance, reset the bar on the boxes by
performing the eccentric phase of a full or partial squatting
motion, depending on the height.
1155
Alternativ ely, if repositioning the bar on the floor, go into a full
squat position, and while resting the bar on the upper thighs,
rotate the arms out from under the bar so that the hands reach
the top of the bar .
From this position, grab the bar with an overhand grip to
partial ly stand upright before replacing the bar on the ground
by perf orming the concentric phase of a deadl ift-type motion.
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
gastrocnemius, soleus, gluteus maximus, rectus femoris,
gluteus medius, erector spinae, internal and external
obliques
1156
  14  FORWARD SLED PUSH AND PULL
Starting Position (Push)
Stand behind the sled and position the hands on the vertical
bars of the prowler at a comfortable height, typical ly
somewher e between hip and knee height in a standing position.
(Note:  The lower the hands are positioned on the prowler, the
more likely this will result in a horizontal trunk and shin
position, which will increase the ability to apply propulsiv e
horizontal f orces and ac celerate the sled. )
Keep the hands closer to the shoulders and elbows near the
hips (shown) or extend the arms forward in front of the body
(not shown), depending on personal pr eference.
1157
If the load is heavy, it is advisable to start with the two feet
positioned together (not shown) to maximiz e the ability to apply
horizontal f orce to ini tiate mo vement of the hea vy sled.
If the load is lighter , it is possible to start in an alternat e split
stance (shown) to bet ter replicate a sprint starting posi tion.
Forward Pushing Phase
While bracing the spine, initiate a stepping pattern that initially
focuses on performing a series of short, relatively fast steps,
which will increase the ability to apply horizontal forces to the
ground.
While building up speed, increase the length of the steps and
further reduce ground contact times. The ability to apply
propulsiv e horizontal forces to the ground can be optimiz ed by
ensuring the front foot is positioned behind the hip throughout
the entir e pushing phase.
Starting Position (Pull)
Stand in front of the sled and attach the sled to the body via a
chest and shoulder harness (shown) or hold separ ate handles in
each hand (not shown).
Regardless of the attachment method to the sled, assume a
position in which the trunk and shin are close to horizontal (not
shown), which will increase the ability to apply propulsiv e
horizontal forces and accelerate the sled. This can be best
achiev ed by placing the hands on the ground (not shown) if
connected via a harness to the sled or by leaning forward (not
shown) i f holding handles in each hand.
If the load is heavy, it is advisable to start with the two feet
positioned together (not shown) to maximiz e the ability to apply
horizontal force to initiate movement of the heavy sled. If the
load is lighter , it is possible to start in an alternate split stance
(shown) to bet ter replicate a sprint starting posi tion.
Forward Pulling Phase
1158
While bracing the spine, initiate a stepping pattern that initially
focuses on performing a series of short, relatively fast steps,
which will increase the ability to apply horizontal forces to the
ground.
While building up speed, increase the length of the steps and
further reduce ground contact times. The ability to apply
propulsiv e horizontal forces to the ground can be optimiz ed by
ensuring the front foot is positioned behind the hip throughout
the entir e pushing phase.
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
gluteus maximus, semimembranosus, semitendinosus,
biceps femoris, vastus lateralis, vastus intermedius, vastus
medialis, rectus femoris, gastrocnemius, soleus
1159
1160
  15  REVERSE SLED DRAG
Starting Position
Stand in front of the sled and attach the sled to the body via a
hip harness (not shown) or hold separ ate handles in each hand
(shown).
Regardless of the attachment method to the sled, lean
backw ard a little while maintaining a relatively extended hip
position, and keep the feet in front of the knees to increase the
ability to apply propulsiv e horizontal forces and accelerate the
sled.
It is advisable to start with the two feet positioned together to
maximiz e the ability to apply horizontal force to initiate
movement of the hea vy sled.
Backward Pulling Phase
Initiate a stepping pattern that initially focuses on performing a
series of short, relatively fast steps, which will increase the
ability to apply horiz ontal f orces to the gr ound.
While building up speed, increase the length of the steps and
further r educe gr ound contact times.
The ability to apply propulsiv e horizontal forces to the ground
can be optimiz ed by ensuring the front foot is typically
positioned in front of the knee throughout the entire pulling
phase.
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
gluteus maximus, semimembranosus, semitendinosus,
biceps femoris, vastus lateralis, vastus intermedius, vastus
medialis, rectus femoris, gastrocnemius, soleus
1161
Other Alternative Exercises
  16  BACK SQUAT WITH BANDS
Band Placement
Loop the ends of long elastic bands around the band pegs of
each side of a power rack. If the rack does not have band pegs,
1162
loop the bands around the handles of heavy dumbbel ls that will
not mo ve during the ex ercise.
Take the other ends of the bands and place them over the ends
of the bar so they rest against the outside of the weight plates
on either side.
The bands should be loose enough that there is no tension at
the bottom of the squat. Tension should be applied to the bar
when the exercise is performed, but at the bottom of the range
of motion, the bands should be slack to apply no load to the
bar. (Note:  Despi te their appear ance, the bands in the second
photo ar e not cr eating an y tension on the bar .)
Starting Position
Grasp the bar wi th a closed, pr onated grip .
Step under the bar and posi tion the f eet par allel to each other .
Place the bar in a balanced position on the upper back and
shoulders; follow the guidel ines for the back squat in chapter 16
regarding the high or low placement of the bar .
Extend the hips and knees to lift the bar off the supporting pins
or ledge, and tak e one or two steps backw ard.
Position the feet shoulder -width apart or wider, even with each
other, and the toes pointed sl ightly outw ard.
Stand with an erect torso by positioning the shoulders back,
tilting the head slightly back, and protruding the chest up and
out to cr eate a neutr al or sl ightly ar ched back.
All repetitions begin f rom this posi tion.
Downward Movement Phase
Begin the exercise by flexin g the hips and knees slowly and
under control while keeping the torso-to-floor angle relatively
constant.
Maintain a flat-foot position with the knees aligned over the feet
as they flex.
1163
Continue flexin g the hips and knees until the thighs are parallel
to the floor, the torso begins to round or flex forward, or the
heels begin to rise of f the floor .
Upward Movement Phase
Raise the bar by extending the hips and knees while keeping
the torso-to-floor angle r elatively constant.
Keep the torso er ect, shoulders back, and chest up and out.
Keep the heels on the floor and the knees al igned o ver the f eet.
Continue exten ding the hips and knees until the body is fully
erect.
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
gluteus maximus, semimembranosus, semitendinosus,
biceps femoris, vastus lateralis, vastus intermedius, vastus
medialis, rectus femoris
1164
  17  ACCENTUATED ECCENTRICALLY
LOADED BENCH PRESS
Note:  This exercise requires the use of weight releasers, which allow
additional load to be applied during the eccentric phase of the
movement. The spotting technique used is identical to that outlined
for the bench pr ess in chapter 16 .
Set-up
Prior to the athlete initiating the movement the spotter should
load the barbel l with the appropriate weight and the weight
releasers ar e attached to the barbel l.
It is important  that the weight releasers are loaded correctly
and placed evenly on the barbell so that they release at the
completion of the down ward movement phase without
disrupting the athlete’ s normal movement pattern. As a gener al
rule, the weight releasers should be set so that they disengage
from the barbel l approximate ly 2 to 4 inches (5-10 cm) before
the completion of the down ward movement (51).
Starting Position
Lie in a supine position on a bench in the five-point  body
contact posi tion.
Place the body on the bench so that the eyes are below the
racked barbel l.
Grasp the barbel l with a closed, pronated grip slightly wider
than shoulder -width apart.
Signal the spotter for assistance in moving the barbel l off the
supports.
Position the barbel l over the chest with the elbows fully
extended.
All repetitions begin f rom this posi tion.
Downward Movement Phase
1165