# Chapter 17: Exercise Technique for Alternative Modes and Nontraditional Implement Training

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

**PDF Pages:** 1088--1185

CHAPTER  17
EXERCISE TECHNIQUE FOR
ALTERNATIVE MODES AND
NONTRADITIONAL
IMPLEMENT TRAINING
Justin Keogh, PhD, and G. Gregory Haff, PhD
After completing this chapter, you will be able to
understand the basic guidel ines f or perf orming r esistance
exercise wi th alternativ e modes and nontr aditional implements;
describe the benefi ts and l imitations of bodyweight tr aining
activities;
identi fy the benefi ts and l imitations associated wi th cor e
training;
identi fy the appr opriate technique and k ey technical fla ws
associated wi th the al ternativ e mode ex ercises;
appropriately determine how to apply r esistance bands and
chains to tr aditional gr ound-based f ree weight ex ercise; and
determine the appr opriate use of al ternativ e methods and
nontraditional implement ex ercises.
The authors would like to acknowl edge the significant contributions of Douglas
Berninger and S cott Caufield to this chapter .
1088
The use of alternativ e modes and nontraditional implement exercises
has become increasingly popular in the strength and condi tioning
profession. Whenever implementing these types of training methods
into training programs, one should consider some basic and specific
guidel ines to ensur e that these methods ar e used saf ely.
1089
Genera l Guidelines
With the use of alternative modes  and nontraditional
implement  exercises, the gener al guidel ines are not very different
from those used with traditional resistance training methods. A
stable body position that allows the athlete to achiev e and maintain
safe and proper body alignment during the performan ce of the
exercise is needed to appropriately stress the skeletal muscle
system. Freestanding ground-based exercises typical ly use a position
in which  the feet are placed slightly wider than shoulder width. With
the use of instabi lity devices, the body position may need to be
modified to ensur e that stability is achiev ed. The grip used with
alternativ e modes and nontraditional implement exercises is typical ly
one of the traditional grips presented in chapter 16. The choice of
grip is based on the demands of the particular exercise. Additional ly,
with many nontraditional implements, the grip can be a limiting
factor in the perf ormance of the ex ercise.
As with more traditional exercises, the breathing pattern often
recommended with these alternativ e methods is for the athlete to
exhale through the sticking point  (concentric portion) and to
inhale during the less stressful portion (eccentric portion) of the
movement. For example, athletes doing the dumbbel l chest press on
a stability ball would inhale as they lower the dumbbel ls to the chest
and exhale as they push them away from the chest. With structur al
exercises (those that load the axial skeleton ), breath holding may
be warranted. Howev er, when one is lifting loads greater than 80%
of maximal voluntary contraction or lifting lighter loads to failure, the
Valsalva maneuver  (forced expiration against a closed glottis) may
be unavoidable (19, 47). The Valsalv a maneuv er allows for an
increase in the intra-abdominal pressure that augments the stability
of the spine, which may be beneficial for performing nontraditional
exercises. For example, with the log clean, the athlete may perform
the Valsalv a maneuv er during the pull and catch portion of the
exercise. The athlete would then exhale after assuming an erect
1090
position. Chapter 16 presents more information on the Valsalv a
maneuv er.
1091
Bodyweight Training Methods
Bodyweight training  methods are among the most basic methods
for performing resistance training. Specifically, with these types of
exercises, the body weight of the individual is used to provide
resistance (56). Activi ties such as push-ups, pull-ups, chin-ups, sit-
ups, and squat thrusts are typical ly mentioned in the context of
bodyweight training. Howev er, activities such as calisthenics,
gymnastics, and yoga could all be classified as bodyweig ht training
methodologies (56). As noted by Behm and colleagues (14),
gymnastics was classical ly a part of the physical education system;
this type of training strongly promotes the development of the core
musculatur e, which, when strengthened, appears to reduce injury
potential. Bodyweight training offers a low-cost training method that
allows f or the dev elopment of r elative strength lev els.
One of the issues related to bodyweight resistance training is the
fact that the resistance load is limited to the individ ual’s body
weight. As such, bodyweight training tends not to significantly affect
absolute strength levels (56). To increase the intensi ty of bodyweight
exercises, one can do several things, including increasing the
number of repetitions or changing the movement pattern. While
increasing the number of repetitions will change the workload, it will
shift the targeted outcome from strength toward strength
endur ance, which shifts the training target away from the
development of strength. Simple modifications to bodyweight
exercises may obviate some of these limitations. Changing the
movement pattern (e.g., elevating the legs while doing a push-up)
will increase the r esistance encounter ed.
Genera l Guidelines f or Alternative Modes
and Nontraditional Implement Exercises
Ensur e proper body al ignment via selection of a stable body posi tion.
1092
If the exercise is a freestanding ground-based exercise, place the feet slightly
wider than shoulder width and k eep them flat on the gr ound.
Use the appropriate grip for the exercise based on the type of exercise (see
chapter 16  for mor e detai l).
Exhale during the concentric portion of the exercise and inhale during the
eccentric phase.
With heavy loads (80% of maximal voluntary contraction or greater) or with
lighter loads performed to failure, the Valsalv a maneuv er may be a useful
technique f or maintaining spinal stabi lity.
Benef its of Bodyweight Training
The following ar e some of the benefi ts of bodyweight tr aining (56):
Is speci fic to each individual’ s anthr opometrics
Often includes closed-chain activi ties that engage mul tiple joints
Strengthens sev eral muscle gr oups simul taneously
Develops r elative strength
Improves body contr ol
Is a versati le form of tr aining that can be done an ywher e
Is a low -cost tr aining al ternativ e
Suspension training  is an alternative method for performing
bodyweight resistance training that allows for the modification of the
resistance applied during numer ous upper and lower body exercise
options (90). Performing this type of training uses devices, referred
to as suspension trainers  (e.g., TRX®), that are typical ly constructed
with sturdy and adjustable straps that have handles or foot straps
attached to one end. These devices are gener ally suspended from a
singular or multiple centralized attachment points above the user’s
head (e.g., wall, squat rack, doorjamb , ceiling) allowing the straps to
hang perpendi cular to the floor (31, 113). Athletes can hang from
the device by holding the strap handles or placing their feet in the
foot straps to manipulate the placement of their center of mass,
which allows for the intens ity of the exercise to be manipulated
(139).
1093
The degree of resistance encounter ed with this type of training is
dictated by altering the angle of the suspension trainer’s straps,
effectively changing the gravitational pull as a percenta ge of the
individual’ s body weight (90, 112). Gener ally, as the athlete’ s center
of mass moves farther away from the anchor point, the lower the
amount of resistance to which the athlete is exposed (90). For
example, Melrose and Dawes (90) report that when the inverted row
is performed with the straps at a 75-degr ee angle from the ground
(i.e., center of mass closer to the attachment point) the intensi ty of
the exercise will correspond to 79.4% ± 2.1% of body weight. If,
howev er, the angle is change d to 30 degrees from the ground (i.e.,
center of mass is farther away from the attachment point), the
resistance encounter ed is reduced to 37.4% ± 21.5%  of body
weight. It is clear based on this study that suspension training is
limited in its ability to provide resistances greater than body weight;
howev er, it is important to note that resistance can be added by
wearing a weighted vest during suspension training, thus increasing
the potential tr aining stimulus (30, 36).
While there are limitations to the amount of load that can be
applied when performing suspension training, this type of training
has sev eral benefi ts (2, 30, 36, 90), including the f ollowing:
Versati lity. Can be used with a wide range of exercises that
target a v ariety of muscle gr oups
Portabi lity. Is easily transported when traveling and can be
used indoors or outdoors
Space-ef ficient . Requires minimal stor age space
Cost-effective. Relatively inexpensiv e compar ed to other
resistance tr aining methods
Scalabi lity. Can be adjusted to increase or decrease difficulty
through changing body posi tion or angle
Balance and coordination . Challenges proprioception and body
awareness
Muscle activation. Changes in body position can alter muscle
activation pat terns
1094
Adaptabi lity. Can be used wi th a v ariety of populations
1095
Core Stability and Balance Training
Methods
There is increasing interest in training the core in an attempt to
improve overall health, rehabi litate from injuries, and enhance
athletic performance (14). To target core stability and balance,
interv entions ranging from traditional ground-based free weight
exercises  to training on unstable devices have been advocated in
the appl ied literature.
Anatomical Focus
The term core is commonly used in the popular media and in some
training journals (13) to refer to the trunk or, more specifically, the
lumbopelvic region of the body (151). Howev er, interpr etation of the
scienti fic literature appears to make an accurate or consistent
defini tion of the core tenuous at best (13, 153). Typical ly, the
anatomical core is defined as the axial skeleton and all the soft
tissues with proximal attachments that originate on the axial
skeleton (13, 14). It is important to note that the appendicular
skeleton includes the pelvic and shoulder girdles, while the soft
tissues include the articular cartilage and fibrocarti lage, ligaments,
tendons, muscles, and fascia (13). Ultimately , the soft tissues act to
gener ate forces (concentric muscle actions) and resist motion
(eccentric and isometric muscle actions).
The muscles that are typical ly associated with the core allow for
the transference of torques and angular momentum during the
performance of integr ated kinetic chain activities, such as kicking or
throwing (111, 151). In fact, Willardson (151) suggests that
increasing an athlete’ s core stability will result in a better foundation
for force production in the upper and lower extremities. Additional ly,
Rodriguez -Perea and colleagues (111) report that increasing core
stability can improve balance outcomes, throwing or hitting velocity,
1096
throwing or hitting distances, vertical jump performance, and
horizontal jump perf ormance.
Isolation Exercises
Isolation exercises  typical ly consist of dynam ic or isometric
muscle actions designed to isolate specific core musculatur e without
the contribution of the lower and upper extremities (14). For
example, comm on exercises performed to isolate the core are the
prone plank (118) and side plank (140). Evidence shows that these
types of isolated exercises can increase muscle activation , which
has been suggested to result in improvements in spinal stability and
a reduction of injuries (94). While evidence suggests that these
types of activities result in improvements in performance in
untrained individuals and those recovering from an injury , support is
limited for the idea that these types of training activities translate to
improvements in sport performance (81, 109, 151). While Lou and
colleagues (81) have reported a positive transfer between the effects
of core training on basketball-related performance, several other
authors have reported that isolated core training is not very effective
at improving sport performance (14, 109, 151). Additional ly,
according to Behm and colleagues (14) and Willardson (151), there
is strong evidence that ground-based free weight exercises (e.g.,
squat, deadl ift, push press, snatch, and exercises that involve trunk
rotation) offer a greater benefi t to actual sport performance
compar ed to isolated core training. Ground-based free weight
activities appear to offer activation of the core musculatur e that is
similar to, or in most cases greater than, what is seen with
traditional isolation exercises designed to engage the core (50, 102).
Isolation exercises may have the greatest benefi t for injured athletes
who are going through the rehabi litation process and are not able to
adequately load traditional ground-based free weight exercises
(151).
1097
Ground-based free weight activities appear to offer
similar or, in most cases,  greater activation of the core
musculature when compared to traditional isolation
exercises designed to engage the core.
Machines Versus Free Weight Exercises
When free weight training methods are compar ed to machine-based
training methods, each has advantages and disadv antages (14, 49,
58, 107, 128). With regard to machine-based training , the
stability provided by the machine may result in a better ability to
target specific muscle groups, which may be useful when  targeting
hypertr ophy (120), but in the context of sport performance, muscle
rarely if ever functions in such an isolated fashion (14). With regard
to the stabilizer muscles, it is gener ally accepted that activation of
these muscles is greater during free weight training when compar ed
with machine- based training (48). In partial support of this belief,
Anderson and Behm (6) state that the activity of the back stabilizers
was 30% lower during a Smith machine squat when compar ed to a
free weight squat. Additionally, there is scienti fic support for the
contention that machine-base d strength gains exert a negligible or a
possible detrimental effect on the muscle activation pattern in
athletic movements (6, 20, 97). Howev er, if instabi lity is increased
via performance of ground-based free weight training on unstable
surfaces or devices, greater decrements in force production, the rate
of force development, and power outputs have been noted (33, 84).
Therefore, based on these data, it appears that free weight ground-
based exercises offer the ideal combination of specificity and
instabi lity, especial ly when one is focusing on strength and power
development. Ultimately , sufficient instabi lity for the development of
sport-speci fic adaptations can be stimulated via the use of traditional
ground-based free weight strength training, and there appears to be
no need to add incr eased instabi lity to these t ypes of ex ercises (14).
1098
Free weight ground-based exercises offer the ideal
combination of specificity and instability, espe cially
when one is focusing on strength and power
development.
Instability Devices
Instabi lity-based exercises are typical ly consider ed those that are
performed on unstable surfaces or devices commonly found in
strength and condi tioning facilities. The increased populari ty of
training on instabi lity devices  seems to have stemmed from their use
by physiother apists in the rehabi litation process. These devices are
used to promote postur al disequi librium or imbalance requiring a
greater stabilizing function of the core musculatur e (14, 151). If
perturbations are applied during use of these devices, a balance
challenge can occur that requires activation of the core musculatur e
in order to induce postur al adjustments to r emain upright (27).
Numer ous instabi lity devices are available to the strength and
condi tioning professional; the most common are the Swiss, physio,
and Pezzi gymnastics balls (14). Other instabi lity options include
hemispherical physiobal ls with one inflated dome side and a flat
rubber side, inflatable disks, wobble boards, balance boards, foam
tubes, and various foam platforms. Natur al surfaces such as sand
can also create scenarios that introduce instabi lity into an athlete’ s
movement pattern, creating an increased balance challenge that
results in increased core muscle activation. Many strength and
condi tioning professionals believe that performing instabi lity
exercises trains the target agonist muscle group while
simultaneously increasing core muscle activation (14). While some
evidence suggests that core muscle activation may be increased, it
appears that this increase occurs in conjunction with reduced force
gener ation by the agonist muscle (13, 33). In fact, as the degree of
instabi lity of the exercise increases, there is a concomi tant reduction
in force-gener ating capaci ty (76). During training with instabi lity
exercises, the overall agonist force-gener ating capaci ty (12) and
1099
overall power output (33) may be less than 70% of what can be
achiev ed when the exercise is performed under stable condi tions.
Additional ly, there can be a significant reduction in the rate of force
development that is achiev ed during the exercise (84). Training with
a reduced force production , power output, and rate of force
development may not be the most advantageous method for
preparing athletes, because these factors have a large impact on
many aspects centr al to suc cessful sport perf ormance.
Overall, performance of resistance exercises on unstable devices
by athletes results in muted performance improvements when
compar ed to training on stable devices (29, 126, 161). The lack of
performance benefi t noted in the literature might be expected based
on the lack of dynamic correspondence between exercises
performed on unstable surfaces and sporting activities (45, 129).
Additional ly, the ineffectiveness of training on unstable surfaces may
also be related to the principle of diminishing returns, because it is
very likely that trained athletes require a much greater adaptiv e
stimulus in terms of force production, movement velocity, and rate of
force development to realize performance gains than can be
provided by instabi lity exercise devices (14, 79). Therefore, the
performance of static balance activities on instabi lity devices may be
consider ed an introductory training step to improve balance and core
stability before the implementation of dynamic or explosiv e ground-
based free weight exercises, such as the Olympic lifts and their
derivatives, that ar e perf ormed on stable surf aces (14 , 161).
Ground-based free weight exercises (e.g., squats,
deadlifts, Olympic lifts and their derivatives) involve a
degree of instability that allows for simultan eous
development of all links of the kinetic chain, offering a
much better training stimulus for the development of
core stabili ty and the enhancement of athletic
performance than do instability device–based exercises.
1100
When used in the rehabi litation setting, unstable devices have
been shown to reduce low back pain and improve the efficiency of
the soft tissues that stabilize the knee and ankle joints (13, 14).
Since several muscles related to the knee joint origin ate in the
lumbopelvic region, the core of the body could be consider ed an
important contributor to the prevention of anterior cruciate
ligament (ACL)  injuries (99). In fact, several studies provide
evidence that using instabi lity devices may reduce the likelihood of
ACL injuries, especial ly after rehabi litation from an ACL injury (100).
For example, Fitzgerald and colleagues (40) reported that activities
that challenge the rehabilitating athlete using perturbations
stimulated by tilt boards, roller boards, and other balance devices
make a successful return to competi tive sport activities five times
more likely. Historical ly, it is often suggested that the addition of
balance training to traditional  training methods results in a reduction
in ACL injuries  (24). Howev er, in a systematic review , Grimm and
colleagues (46) contest this contention and suggest that these types
of interventions do not reduce ACL injury risk. In contrast, ground-
based free weight activities seem to have a more balanced effect,
leading to improvements in performance while increasing core
strength and balance abilities. Ultimately , the use of instabi lity-based
exercises to train the core seems to be an effective method for
returning the injured athlete to competi tive-based training but
provides a suboptimal training stimulus and provides little benefi t for
healthy uninjur ed athletes.
1101
Variable-Resistance Training Methods
Resistance training practices include three methods for applying
overload to the body: constant external , accommodating , and
variable resistance  (41, 88). The most common method for
applying resistance during training is to use a constant external load,
which is best represented by traditional resistance training methods
(e.g., free weights). In this scenario , the external load remains
constant throughout the range of motion, better represents real-life
activities, and allows for a more realistic skeletal muscle coordination
and movemen t pattern (54, 88, 106). On the other hand,
accommodating resistance (sometimes referred to as semi-isokinetic
resistance applications ) gener ally allows for the speed of movement
or isokinetic resistance to be controlled throughout a range of
motion (88, 128). Stone and colleagues (128) suggest that these
types of devices have poor external validity. Additional ly, these
devices are unlikely to provide an adequate training stimulus when
compar ed to more traditional methods such as those involving
constant -loaded free weight movements, particularly when those
movements ar e perf ormed wi th mul tijoint mo vement pat terns.
With traditional resistance training exercise, the extern al load
remains constant, but the forces exerted by the muscle vary in
accordance with the mechanical advantages associated  with the
joints involved in the movement (17, 41, 130). In order to combat
the changing mechanical advantages and inertial properties
associated with constant -loaded resistance, a concerted effort has
been made to develop innovative training devices that allow the
applied resista nce to be varied in conjunction with changes in joint
angle (41, 145). These variable-r esistance methods attempt to alter
the resistance, so the muscle maximiz es force application throughout
the full range of motion (130, 145). For example, in the back squat
the greatest muscle force production occurs at the midpoint of the
movement, while the smallest forces are produced at the bottom.
Thus variable-r esistance methods would be used to reduce
1102
resistance at the bottom of the squat ting motion and increase
resistance as the athlete ascends from the bottom position. Another
consider ation is that during the concentric effort of a movement, a
large portion of time is spent  deceler ating (41). Overall, it has been
suggested that variable-r esistance methods may be able to match
the changes in joint leverage (164), overcome the mechanical
disadv antages associated with specific joint angles (35, 123, 124,
146), and pr ovide f or compensatory ac celeration (123, 124).
With the use of a variable-loaded resistance model, the
methodology most commonly seen in modern strength and
condi tioning facilities is the application of chains or rubber bands
(41, 89, 133). The combination of chains or bands with traditional
free weight resistance training methods has been shown to alter the
loading profile typical ly seen during these constant -loade d activities
(41, 66). Specifically, the chains or bands allow for the resistance to
be varied acr oss the r ange of motion achiev ed during the activi ty.
With use of a variable-loaded resistance model, the
most common methodology used in modern strength
and conditioning facilities is the application of chains or
rubber bands.
Chain-Supplemented Exercises
One increasingly popular method of applying variable resistance is
the addition of chains  to traditional resistance training activities
such as the bench press or back squat (8, 17, 59, 88, 145). This
method of force application is most popular among powerl ifters
(134) but has become increasingly popular among strength and
condi tioning professionals working with a variety of sports (149).
Despi te the increasing popula rity and the belief that these methods
provide a training advantage, these beliefs are largely
unsubstantiated in the scientific literature (17, 18, 59, 88, 130).
Some studies, howev er, demonstr ate that the application of chains
to traditional resistance training methods such as the bench press (7,
1103
10) can be advantageous. Careful inspection of these studies reveals
that the means by which the chains are applied to the free weight
exercise may influence their effectiveness. Specifically, these studies
used a method in which the chain was suspended from the bar
without touching the floor until the athlete had reached the lowest
position in the squat or until the bar had reached chest height in the
bench press (7, 10). While some resear ch seems to support this
methodology , much more resear ch is needed to explor e the various
methods of applying chains to traditional resistanc e training
methods.
Determining Resistance With Chains
The resistance provided by chains is largely dictate d by the
structur e, density, length, and diameter of the chain and must be
quanti fied before the chain is used in a resistance training setting.
Additional ly, the number of links in a chain will affect the amount of
resistance provided by the chain (17, 89). To quanti fy the loading
provided by chains, Berning and colleagues (17) developed a
practical chart that related chain link diameter and length to the
resistance load provided by the chain. This chart was later modified
by McMaster and colleagues (88) to show the relationship between
the chain mass, length, and diameter ( table 17 .1).
TABLE 17.1  Mass, Length, and Diameter of Chains
Chain
diametersChain lengths
10 CM (4
IN.)50 CM (20
IN.)100 CM (39
IN.)150 CM (59
IN.)200 CM (79
IN.)
6.4 mm (1/4 in. )0.3 kg (0. 7
lb)1.3 kg (2.9
lb)2.5 kg (5.5
lb)3.8 kg (8.4
lb)5.0 kg (11.0
lb)
9.5 mm (3/8 in. )0.4 kg (0.9
lb)1.9 kg (4 .2
lb)3.7 kg (8.2
lb)5.6 kg (12.3
lb)7.4 kg (16.3
lb)
Adapted by permission from D.T. McMaster , J. Cronin, and M. McGuigan, “Forms of Variable
Resistance T raining, ” Strength and Condi tioning Journal  31, no . 1 (2009): 60
1104
12.7 mm (1/2
in.)0.7 kg (1.5
lb)3.7 kg (8.2
lb)7.4 kg (16.3
lb)11.1 kg
(24.5 lb)14.8 kg (32.6
lb)
19.1 mm (3/4
in.)1.4 kg (3.1
lb)7.0 kg (15.4
lb)14.0 kg
(30.9 lb)21.0 kg
(46.3 lb)28.0 kg (61. 7
lb)
22.2 mm (7/8
in.)2.2 kg (4 .9
lb)10.8 kg
(23.8 lb)21.6 kg (47 .6
lb)32.4 kg
(71.4 lb)43.2 kg (95.2
lb)
25.4 mm (1 in. )2.8 kg (6.2
lb)14.0 kg
(30.9 lb)28.0 kg (61. 7
lb)42.0 kg
(92.6 lb)56.0 kg
(123.5 lb)
Adapted by permission from D.T. McMaster , J. Cronin, and M. McGuigan, “Forms of Variable
Resistance T raining, ” Strength and Condi tioning Journal  31, no . 1 (2009): 60
Determining the Load to Use With Chains
To determine the load used with chains, the absolute chain resistance at the top
and at the bottom portion of the movement are summed and then averaged. For
example, if athletes wanted to train at a 5-repetition maximum (5RM) load in the
bench press, they would first determin e the 5RM load without the chains. Then, if
their 5RM is 120 kilograms (265 lb), they would subtract the average chain
resistance from this load. If at the bottom position the load is 0 kilograms and at
the top the chain load is 11.1 kilograms (24.5 lb), the average is 5.55 kilograms
(12.2 lb). Thus, the athlete would add 114 to 115 kilograms (251.3-253.5 lb) to
the barbel l to achiev e the appr opriate loading.
As a means of deciding on the barbel l resistance to use in
conjunction with chains, the absolute load is determined for the top
and the bottom portion of the movement (8). The average of these
two loads is then calculated and used to modify the barbel l load in
order to al low the athlete to tr ain in the pr escribed r ange.
As a gener al rule, Baker (8) recommends that the use of chains
be reserved for experienced intermediate- and elite-lev el athletes
who have stable exercise technique, because the addition of chains
provides a loading chal lenge that can af fect the athlete’ s technique.
Applying Chains to Free Weight Exercises
Gener ally, the application of chains to traditional resistance training
methods allows for a linear increase in the applied resistance (88).
1105
Ways to apply chains include letting them touch the floor from the
fully extended position during the movement (17) or hanging them
from lighter chains (figure 17.1), which  allows them to touch the
floor only on reaching the lowest portion (figure 17.2) of the
movement pattern (i.e., bottom of the squat or at chest level during
the bench press) (8, 10). Baker (8) suggests that the second method
may affect the velocity of movement in three distinct ways. First, the
total barbel l–chain complex comes into play only at the top of the
movement (i.e., extend portion) when the chain links have been
lifted off the floor. At the bottom of the movement, the links are in
full contact with the floor, providing a reduction in load and allowing
the athlete to accelerate the barbel l at a faster rate. Second, it is
possible that a within-r epetition postactiv ation potentiation effect
may occur in response to a greater neural activation. Specifically,
when the chains pile on the floor and the mass of the barbel l
decreases, a greater neuromuscular activation may occur, allowing
for an enhancement in movement velocity. Finally, it is possible that
the decreasing resistance at the bottom portion of the movement
may cause a more rapid stretch–shortening cycle. Baker (8)
suggests that this happens in response to the eccentric unloading
that occurs when the chain links pile on the floor at the bottom of
the movement and a quicker amortization phase occurs when the
athlete shi fts from ec centric to concentric muscle action.
1106
FIGURE 17.1 Bench press with added chain resistance. The links of the chains are
draped over the lighter supporting chains, such that the chain does not contact the floor
until the barbel l reaches chest height. As the athlete lowers the barbel l to the chest, the
resistance progressively decreases as the chains furl onto the floor. Conversely , as the
athlete moves the barbel l concentrical ly away from the chest, the resistance progressively
increases as the chains unf url from the floor .
FIGURE 17.2 When the barbel l is at chest height during the bench press, the chains are
furled on the floor , with the r esult that their weight does not act on the barbel l.
Resistance Band Exercises
The use of resistance bands  to augment traditional barbel l
resistances has become increasingly popular among strength and
condi tioning professionals (8, 39, 77, 138, 145). There is some
resear ch support for the use of resistance bands combined with
1107
traditional resistance training exercises (5, 104, 127, 146). For
example, Wallace and colleagues (146) suggest that using bands to
substi tute 35% of the total load during a back squat can acutely
increase peak power by approximately 13%. Additional ly, Baker and
Newton (9) suggest that the use of bands may result in a
postactiv ation potentiation effect within each repetition. Support for
this contention comes from the work of Stevenson and colleagues
(127), who demonstr ated that the use of bands to account for 20%
of the training load resulted in an acute increase in the concentric
rate of force development when compar ed to a constant -loaded
condi tion. While these data seem to suggest that the addition of
bands to traditional resistance training methods may offer some
benefi t, especi ally to power or rate of force development (66), some
resear ch conte sts these findings (35, 115). For example, Ebben and
Jensen (35) report no differences in integr ated electr omyography
and mean ground reaction forces when resistance bands are used to
apply 10% of the total loading during squats.
Currently, minimal resear ch on the use of resistance bands,
especial ly longitudinal studies, has been conducted to determine
whether the acute effects noted by some authors translate into
superior strength and power gains over time. Howev er, there is
some evidence that the use of resistance bands during an off-season
strength training program performed by Division 1AA footbal l players
induces a greater increase in upper body strength when compar ed
to performing traditional bench press training (44). While these data
are promising and provide some support for using bands as part of a
performance-based resistan ce training program, much more
resear ch is needed to understand how these methods can be
integr ated into a periodiz ed training pr ogram.
Determining Resistance With Resistance Bands
In working with resistance bands, it is important to understand that
their composi tion varies depending on the type of therm oplastic or
elastomer used to produce them (88). The composi tion of resistance
1108
bands is important because it can exert an impact on their overall
stiffness, density, yield, and tensile strength (82, 88, 89, 138).
Ultimately , the tension (resistance) gener ated by a resistance band is
determined by the overall stiffness of the band and the extent to
which the band is stretched (deformation) (89, 165). Specifically,
based on Hooke’s law, the tension gener ated by a band is equal to
its stiffness ( k) multiplied by the def ormation ( d):
Tension = Stiffness  (k) × Deformation  (d)
As the band is stretched (i.e., increased deformation), the amount
of tension placed on the band linearly increases. Howev er, several
studies suggest that resistance bands exhibi t both curvilinear and
linear def ormation r egions (5, 89, 105).
When using bands in conjunction with traditional free weight
training exercises such as the bench press or back squat, the
strength and condi tioning professional must be aware that there can
be a 3.2% to 5.2% difference between two supposedly equal bands
that could result in an 8% to 19% difference in mean tension
between the bands (89). A basic length–tension relations hip can be
seen in table 17.2, and tension can be predicted based on the length
of the band wi th the use of a pr ediction equation.
TABLE 17.2  Examples of Resistance Band Length–
Tension Relationships
Width
(mm) ColorLength–tension relationships
Tension
prediction
equation110 CM
(43.3
IN.)120 CM
(47.2
IN.)130 CM
(51.2
IN.)140 CM
(55.1
IN.)150 CM
(59.1
IN.)
14 Yellow 2.6 kg
(5.7 lb)5.7 kg
(12.6 lb)8.1 kg
(17.9 lb)9.8 kg
(21.6 lb)11.5 kg
(25.4 lb)Y = −0.003x2 +
0.98x − 69.82
22 Red 4.6 kg
(10.1 lb)9.6 kg
(21.2 lb)13.3 kg
(29.3 lb)16.6 kg
(36.6 lb)19.2 kg
(42.3 lb)Y = −0.004x2 +
1.38x − 99.49
Adapted by permiss ion from D.T. McMa ster, J. Cronin, and M. McGuigan, “Quanti fication of
Rubber and Chain-B ased Resistance Modes, ” Journal of Strength and Condi tioning
Resear ch 24, no. 8 (2010): 2061.
1109
32 Blue 8.5 kg
(18.7 lb)14.8 kg
(32.6 lb)19.5 kg
(43.0 lb)23.9 kg
(52.7 lb)27.3 kg
(60.2 lb)Y = −0.004x2 +
1.60x − 114 .86
48 Green 11.8 kg
(26.0 lb)16.5 kg
(36.4 lb)24.0 kg
(52.9 lb)30.0 kg
(66.1 lb)49.3 kg
(108.7
lb)Y = −0.007x2 +
2.43x − 179.56
67 Black 15.4 kg
(34.0 lb)29.1 kg
(64.2 lb)40.0 kg
(88.2 lb)49.3 kg
(108.7
lb)57.2 kg
(126 lb)Y = −0.010x2 +
3.73x − 269.21
Adapted by permiss ion from D.T. McMa ster, J. Cronin, and M. McGuigan, “Quanti fication of
Rubber and Chain-B ased Resistance Modes, ” Journal of Strength and Condi tioning
Resear ch 24, no. 8 (2010): 2061.
Similar to how resistance is applied with the use of chains, the
use of bands requires the strength and condi tioning professional to
determine how much load is provided by the free weigh t and how
much is provided from the bands throughout the range of movement
(8). Specifically, the strength and condi tioning professional must
determine the load of the band at the bottom and top portions of
the movement  and create an average of these two loads. Based on
the recommen dations of Baker (8), an athlete who wants to train at
a 5RM load of 150 kilograms (331 lb) with bands would subtract the
average of the two band positions (i.e., top and bottom) and reduce
the load on the bar by that amount. So if the band exerts a zero
resistance load at the bottom of the movement and a load of 26.6
kilograms (58.6 lb) at the top position (i.e., lockout in the bench
press), based on the length of the band achiev ed as it is stretched,
the athlete would subtract 13.3 kilograms (29.3 lb) from the total
weight on the bar without the bands to get 136 to 137 kilograms
(300-302 lb).
Applying Resistance Bands to Free Weight Exercises
To apply resistance bands to free weight resistance exercises, one
can use a multitude of methods. The band may be attached to the
barbel l and either a customiz ed attachment point on a squat rack or
heavily weight ed dumbbel ls (8). When the bands are applied, the
1110
highest tension  and the total resistance load are provided to the
athlete at the top position. Conversely , at the bottom position the
applied load is reduced, because the bands will no longer be
stretched and thus no longe r apply resistance to the barbell. For
example, in the squat at the lowest point (i.e., bottom position,
figure 17.3), the bands are slack and do not actively create tension
on the barbel l, thus adding no additional resistance to the exercise.
As the athlete ascends from the bottom position and approaches the
lockout position, the bands will impart a larger stretch resistance,
and the athlete will experience the full load of both the bar and the
bands (figure 17.4). It is important to note that as the athlete
ascends from the bottom position the stretch load gradual ly
increases. Conversely , as the athlete descends, the stretch load
gradual ly decr eases.
FIGURE 17.3  Bottom posi tion of a squat perf ormed wi th bands.
1111
FIGURE 17.4  Top posi tion of a squat perf ormed wi th bands.
Application of an Accentuated Eccentric
Load
The prescription of training loads during resistance training typical ly
emplo ys the use of a constant load that is lifted during the eccentric
and concentric portions of the resistance training exercise. This
practice creates a unique loading problem because it is well
documented that muscles are stronger during eccentric (i.e.,
lengthening) versus concen tric (i.e., shortening) muscle actions,
resulting in what is referred to as an eccentric strength deficit (figure
17.5) (51, 91). In fact, depending on the exercise, up to 50% more
force can be produced during eccentric muscle actions when
compar ed to concentric muscle actions (34, 53, 64, 70, 143). As
1112
such, the use of constant loads during resistance training results in a
lower relative load being used during the eccentric phase of the
movement when compar ed to the concentric phase (144). As a
result of this submaximal loading, motor unit recruitment and firing
rates during the eccentric phase of the movement may be reduced
(125), sarcoplasmic calcium release may decrease, and stimulus for
myocellular adaptations may be reduced (42). To address these
issues, alternativ e training methods applying load during resistance
training are often sought so that loads are applied in a phase-
specific manner when targeting hypertr ophic adaptations and
increases in maximal str ength (144).
FIGURE 17.5 Example strength  deficit between the eccentric and concentric 1-repetition
maximum (1RM) in the bench pr ess.
Data from Kelly et al. (2015).
One variable resistance training strategy that addresses this
differential is the use of accentuated eccentric loading (AEL) ,
which is sometimes referred to as augmented eccentric loading
(95, 132). With this loading  strategy , an additional load is applied
during the eccentric phase of the movement and then removed
during the concentric phase of the movement. For example, an
eccentric muscle action can be overloaded during a
countermo vement jump by holding dumbbel ls and releasing them
1113
before the initiation of the vertical jump (122). Alternativ ely, if the
athlete’ s 1RM bench press is 120 kilograms (265 lb), the eccentric
phase of the movement could be performed with 100% of the
concentric 1RM (i.e., 120 kg [265 lb]) and the load can be reduced
to 60% of 1RM (i.e., 72 kg [159 lb]) during the concentr ic phase of
the exercise (32). Typical ly, this is accompl ished with the use of
weight releasin g devices, often referred to as a weight release r (91,
95).
Benefits Associated With Accentuated Eccentric
Loading
The primary benefi ts associated with the use of AEL occur as a result
of an overload  applied during the eccentric phase of a resistance
training or jumping exercise (91). Relatively little resear ch has
explor ed the chronic application of AEL, but due to the greater
mechanical tension (43) and work (142, 143) during the eccentric
phase, some resear chers have suggested that AEL would be useful
when targeting hypertr ophy. While this rationale is sound , based on
the available resear ch increases in muscle size associated with AEL
are compar able to traditional training methods (78, 119). It is,
howev er, plausible that AEL results in architectur al change s, such as
the elongation of the muscle fascicles, allowing for higher shortening
velocities which could affect strength and power performance (91).
Additional ly, the application of AEL tactics may have further benefi ts
to enhancing strength and power performance by inducing changes
to the neuromuscular system (144). This hypothesis is partial ly
supported by the work of Walker and colleagues (144),  who have
reported improved voluntar y muscle activation and significantly
greater improvements in maximal strength after 10 weeks of training
with AEL when compar ed to traditional resistance  training.
Ultimately , while there is an emerging body of evidence that using
AEL tactics stimulates greater improvements in maximal strength
(52, 144) and jump performance (141), more resear ch is needed to
determine the most ef fective AEL pr ogramming str ategies.
1114
Programming and Accentuated Eccentric Loading
When implementing AEL as part of a periodiz ed resistance training
program it is important that the strength and condi tioning
professional remember that AEL is an advanced training tactic that is
used to exploi t the establ ished benefi ts of eccentric overload training
(131). As such, this training tactic should be used with caution, and
it is important that the athlete’s resistance training experience and
strength levels are consider ed when determining the exercises that
AEL is implem ented with and the loads used during both the
eccentric and concentric phases of the mo vement (91).
Accentuated eccentric loading (AEL) is an adva nced
training tactic and should be reserved for athletes with
extensive resistance training experience.
When programming AEL exercises the magni tude of the eccentric
load is gener ally consider ed as either being submaximal (i.e.,
<100% of concentric 1RM), maximal (i.e., 100% of concentric 1RM),
or supramaximal (i.e., >100% of concentric 1RM) (91, 143). The
decision about which eccentri c load to apply is likely mitigated by the
targeted performance outcome and by the athlete’ s training
experience and their relative strength levels, with stronger athletes
likely experiencing greater benefi ts from training with AEL tactics
(91).
One approach for implement ing submaximal AEL is to apply this
loading tactic with kettlebel ls, dumbbel ls, or elastic bands while
performing plyometric exercises (e.g., countermo vement, box, drop,
and depth jumps) (figure 17.6) (1, 91). For example, when a 20-
kilogram (44 lb; ~20% of body mass) load is applied with dumbbel ls
that are held during the eccentric phase and released prior to the
concentric phase of a countermo vement jump, jump performance is
acutely enhanced (122). Similarly, when an eccentric load that is
20% to 30% of body mass is applied during the eccentric phase of a
drop jump and released before the concentric phase of the jump,
1115
performance is improved (1). Ultimately , based on the available
evidence, loads of 20% to 30% of body mass should be
implemented during AEL when attempting to potentiate performance
during the concentric phase of a ply ometric jumping activi ty (91).
FIGURE 17.6 Accentuated eccentric loading prescription recommendations for plyometric
exercises.
Adapted by permission from J.J. Merrigan, J. Borth, C.B. Taber, et al., “Application of Accentuated Eccentric Loading to
Elicit Acute and Chronic Velocity and Power Improvements: A Narrative Review,” International Journal of Strength and
Conditioning 2, no 1. (2022): 12. Distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International
License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
The application of maximal and supramaximal AEL are best suited
for multijoint resistance training exercises, such as the bench press,
back squat, and front squat with the use of either weight releasers
or computer -driven devices (figure 17.7) (92, 98, 136). For example,
Taber and colleagues (136) report significant improvements in
concentric velocity with loads between 30% and 80% of the 1RM
during the bench press when  a maximal AEL (100% of the 1RM) is
implemented. Conversely , when supramaximal AEL is applied with
loads between  105% and 120% of the concentric 1RM, slower
concentric movement velocities occur during the repetition when the
concentric phase is performed with loads between 30% and 80% of
the 1RM (25, 78, 91-93, 142). Howev er, it is plausible that the
differential between the AEL and the load lifted during the concentric
phase of the movement mitigates the acute performance  gains. For
example, if a differential >40% between the AEL and the concentric
load is programmed, significant acute increases in velocity and
power occur during the concentric phase of the repetition (92).
1116
Additional ly, when this type of loading is applied longitudinal ly,
significantly gr eater incr eases in maximal str ength oc cur (144).
FIGURE 17.7 Accentuated eccentric loading (AEL) prescription recommendations for
resistance tr aining ex ercises.
Adapted by permission from J.J. Merrigan, J. Borth, C.B. Taber, et al., “Application of Accentuated Eccentric Loading to
Elicit Acute and Chronic Velocity and Power Improvements: A Narrative Review,” International Journal of Strength and
Conditioning 2, no 1. (2022): 12. Distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International
License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
When programming AEL, three basic strategies can be
implemented: using AEL on every repetition contained within the
set, only apply ing AEL on the first repetition of the set, or using AEL
on the first repetition of a cluster set (figure 17.8) (51). When AEL is
applied on every repetition of a set the set must be structu red with a
cluster set format (i.e., 15-40 s interr epetition rest) so that the
weight releaser can be reappl ied after every repetition (figure
17.8a). The rest interval applied should be structur ed to account for
the time needed to reapply the weight releaser and to re-rack and
un-rack the bar. Alternativ ely, the AEL can be applied on the first
repetition of the set, which allows the repetitions contained in the
set to be performed in a continuous manner with enhanced
1117
movement velocity occurring during the later repetitions contained
within the set (figure 17.8b) (51). For example, Merrigan and
colleagues (92) report that when supramaximal loads are applied on
only the first repetition of a set of 5 the velocity of movement during
repetitions 3 and 5 is significantly enhanced. Based on these data, a
hybrid strategy could be emplo yed where a series of cluste r sets of 3
repetitions could be performed with the AEL applied on the first
repetition and 25 to 35 seconds of intraset rest applied between
clusters (figure 17.8c). With loading pattern, a greater density of AEL
can be applied while still getting acute performance enhancement
during the thir d repetition of each cluster (51, 92, 101).
1118
Nontraditional Implement Training
Methods
Traditional ly, resistance training interv entions used in most modern
strength and condi tioning facilities have relied heavily on barbel ls,
dumbbel ls, and various resistance training machines. More recently ,
strength and condi tioning professionals have begun to incorpor ate
nontraditional implements to potential ly improve training specificity
and to add greater variation to the preparation of athletes.
Nontr aditional implements can include items that are typical ly
associated with strongman training  such as tires, logs, kettlebel ls,
stones, weighted sleds, and other weighted implements (59).
Strongman Training
Strongman implement training has recently seen an increase in
populari ty as a proposed tool for enhancing sport performance (15,
87, 116, 147, 159, 166). Some of the most common strongman
exercises are tire flipping, log (or keg) lifting, farmer ’s walks, and
sled pushes and pulls. While resear ch on these types of exercises is
limited, some evidence sugge sts that they can be used to introduce
a high-intensi ty stimulus resulting in an elevated blood lactate
response (16, 73, 166). Additional ly, it has been suggested that
these types of exercises create a greater degree of instabi lity that
effectively challenges the athlete in different ways compar ed to
traditional resistance training activities (87). Recent systematic
reviews on the biomechanics of strongman have critiqued the
resear ch methodologies emplo yed (63) as well as the results and
potential applications of this type of training within strength and
condi tioning (62).
1119
FIGURE 17.8  Example of ac centuated ec centric loading (AEL) set structur es.
Adapted by permission from M. Harden, P. Comfort, and G.G. Haff, “Eccentric Training: Scientific Background and
Practical Applications,” in Advanced Strength and Conditioning: An Evidence-Based Approach, 2nd ed., edited by A.N.
Turner and P. Comfort (Routledge, 2022), permission conveyed through Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.
Resear ch documenting the chronic training-r elated adaptations
from strongma n-type training are particularly scarce (3, 60, 96, 157,
162). Winwood and colleagues (157) compar ed seven weeks of
strongman compar ed to traditional resistance training on body
composi tion, strength, power , and speed measur es in 30 resistance-
1120
trained, sub-el ite rugby players. While both groups tended to report
improvements in strength and functional performance measur es
(0.2%-7%), no significant differences were observ ed between
groups. This would indicate that strongman training can be equal ly
as effective as traditional training and that its use might provide
additional variety and interest to highly experienced resistance-
trained athlete s who may benefi t from more variations in their
training stimulus.
Heavy sled pulls have also been the focus of some training studies
(96, 157). For example, the training study by Winwood and
colleagues (157) attempted to match strongman to traditional
resistance training exercises. One example was the use of heavy sled
pulls with 85% of the athlete’ s 1RM back squat for 3 sets of 25
meters (27 yd). Morin and colleagues (96) have also compar ed eight
weeks of heavy sled sprint training (10 × 20 m [22 yd] sprints per
session with 80% of body mass) to a control group performing
unresisted sprinting on sprinting performance. Heavy sled training
produced a range of moder ate effect size improvements in horizontal
force productio n and 5-meter (5 yd) sprint performance, with effect
sizes indicating that heavy sled training had small to moder ate
benefi ts when compar ed to traditional sprinting. Further , a meta-
analysis including 13 studies demonstr ated the effectiveness of
resisted sled training with a range of loads (5%-80% body mass) for
improving acceleration (up to 10 m [11 yd]) but not maximum-
velocity sprint performance (3), with no clear indication of what
consti tutes the most ef fective loads.
The effect of tire flipping has also been examined in one study
(162), whereby 29 physical ly active males performed 4 sets of 6
repetitions with either lighter (43 kg [95 lb]) or heavier (104 kg [229
lb]) tires for two sessions per week for 8 weeks. Both groups
significantly improved 6RM bench press, intermi ttent endurance, five
horizontal jumps and change -of-direction ability, with no significant
between-gr oup differences in these responses. Neither group
1121
reported significant improvements in 20-meter (22 yd) sprint times
or repeated sprint abi lity.
Due to the potential ly more awkward and unpredictable nature of
strongman training compar ed to traditional resistance training,
muscle activation and injury risk may also differ substantial ly
between these  training approaches. McGill and colleagues (87)
quanti fied trunk and hip muscle activity and kinetics across the
farmer ’s walk, suitcase carry (unilateral farmer ’s walk), yoke walk,
tire flip, log lift, keg lift, and stone lift. While all of these movements
required exceedingly high levels of activation of certain trunk and hip
muscles and produced large spinal loads, these biomechanical
characteristics exhibi ted consider able between-ex ercise variation.
Such results suggest that each of these strongman exercises impose
somewhat unique challenges on the trunk and hip musculatur e,
suggesting that the inclusion of a variety of strongman  exercises
may be useful to better develop spinal stability across a range of
movement si tuations.
Regarding injury risk, the somewhat unique challenges imposed
by different strongman exercises (87) may be consistent with the
views of 213 strongman athletes who felt that certain exercises (tire
flip, yoke walk, and stone lift) were more danger ous and likely to
contribute to injury risk when compar ed to other strongman
exercises (158) . Perhaps as a consequence of the common usage of
the tire flip, yoke walk, and stone lift by strongman athletes, two
systematic reviews have reported greater injury rates in strongman
athletes when compar ed to other strength sport athlete s such as
weightl ifters, powerl ifters, and bodybui lders (74, 121). Consequently ,
athletes who perform strongman exercises should focus on
performing these exercises with appropriate technique and only use
loads that allow them to maintain adequate body and implement
control.
1122
Tire Flipping
Tire flipping typical ly emplo ys truck or heavy-equipment tires that
can be modified via placem ent of an extra load in the center to
address individual strength needs (59, 147). The select ion of the
appropriate tire size depends on numer ous factors that the strength
and condi tioning professional must consider when designing a
specific program for an athlete. Thought must be given to the tire’s
dimensions, including the height, width, and weight (21). A key
consider ation is the tread on the tire; worn treads are more difficult
to grip, and pronounced treads potential ly contain cuts, debris, or
exposed metal that could put the athlete at risk f or injury (21, 147).
The most common injury associated with the tire flip is biceps
tears (158), which may occur when the hands slip on the tire. To
mitigate this injury risk, it is gener ally recommended that the tires
used should be dry and have sufficient tread to allow the athlete to
maintain grip and properly execute the exercise (21). Additional ly, it
is important that the tire is selected based on the individu al athlete’ s
strength levels and that the movement is performed with
appropriate ex ercise technique so that injury risk is minimiz ed.
Three basic techniques have been used to describe tire flip
techniques: the sumo , the backlift style, and shoulders- against -the-
tire technique (21, 147). The sumo and backlift styles are somewhat
similar in that the feet are placed close to the tire, but they differ on
the width of the feet, somewhat similar to the sumo and
conventional deadlift startin g positions, respectiv ely (147). With
these two techniques, once the tire has been raised to hip or chest
height, the hands are rotated  so that a forward pressing action can
be performed with the arms to flip the tire (147). The shoulders-
against -the-tir e technique has a similar starting position to a rugby
scrum or prowler push, with the athlete’ s face almost touching the
tire, trunk horizontal, and the feet positioned behind the body so
that the shins are horizontal, with the knees positioned slightly in
front of the hips and flex ed to appr oximately 90 degr ees (21).
1123
Limited resear ch has investigated tire flipping techniqu es (73,
162). Keogh and colleagues (73) primari ly quanti fied the phases and
tempor al characteristics most related to successful (fast) completion
of 2 sets of 6 repetitions of a 232-ki logram (511 lb) tire flip,
separ ated by 3 minutes’ rest. The phases of the movement were
broken down into a first pull, second pull, transition, and push,
somewhat similar to the clean and jerk. Results suggested that
minimizing time during the second pull and push phases was most
associated with faster flips, suggesting that the tire flip may be used
as an alternativ e to exercises such as clean and jerk to develop total
body power. To optimiz e this development of total body power , the
athlete should emphasiz e a powerf ul triple extension of the lower
extremities to gener ate sufficient momentum for the tire to continue
to rotate upward and forward before the push phase. This will also
require the selection of appropriately sized tires that allow this rapid
triple extensio n and transition to the push phase so that each
repetition is perf ormed r elatively quickly (~3-4 s).
Tire Flipping (Shoulders-Against-the-Tire
Technique): Common Technical Flaws and
Corrections
Flaw: Placing the f eet too close to the tir e when ini tiating the mo vement.
When this occurs, athletes often have to round their back and position their
knees close to their chest in or der to ini tiate the mo vement.
Correction : Have athletes move their feet away from the tire, and instruct
them to brace their spine and use a forceful triple extension of the lower
extremities that r aises their chest and tir e off the gr ound.
Flaw: Hips rise f aster than the shoulders during the ini tial pushing motion.
This flaw is very similar to what can be seen during traditional deadl ifting
with incorr ect technique.
Correction : Instruct athletes to keep their hips low and drive the tire forward
rather than l ifting i t.
Flaw: A lifting motion is used instead of a pushing motion.
1124
With heavier tires, this motion reduces the lifting speed; the tire will lose
momentum as it is elevated to hip height, forcing the athlete to “muscle” the
tire over. This position places substantial ly greater load on the biceps and the
risk of biceps injury , and the tire is also more likely to fall backw ard onto the
athlete.
Correction : The athlete should be encour aged to drive the tire forward and
move forward with the tire as it is elevated. One cue is to strike the tire with
the quadriceps at hip height and continue a f orward movement pat tern.
Adapted by permission from J.B. Bullock and D.M.M. Aipa, “Coaching Considerations for the Tire Flip,”
Strength and Conditioning Journal 32, no. 5 (2010): 76-77.
Log Lifting
One of the classic exercises that is a part of strongman training is
the log lift, which is essentially a version of the clean and overhead
press. Other traditional lifting movements can also be performed
with logs, such as cleans, presses, jerks, rows, squats, deadl ifts, and
lunges (59, 108, 156). Logs are typical ly made from metal and
designed to have weight added to them while offering a midrange
grip support to accommodate a neutral grip position (108). Weight is
typical ly added with the use of traditional plates, which eliminates
much of the need f or having a v ariety of logs (59).
The biomecha nics of the log lift have been examined in two
studies (110, 155). Using six strongman athletes, Winwood and
colleagues (155) compar ed the log lift and clean and jerk, using
loads of 70% 1RM clean and jerk. Both exercises involved triple
extension of lower extremities and the production of high levels of
vertical force. The log lift produced significantly greater impulse as
well as hip and trunk range of motion but significantly less vertical
velocity and power than the clean and jerk. Such differences
probably reflected the greater challenges in rapidly moving the body
and the log due to its greater diameter than the barbel l. Such a view
is suppo rted by Renals and colleagues (110), whereby a thinner log
(250 mm [1.0 in.] diamete r) allowed 10 strongman athletes to
produce significantly greater power , velocity, and force than a thicker
log (316 mm [1.2 in. ] diameter).
1125
Weighted Carries
Strongman competi tions commonly involve a range of weighted
carries  including the farmer ’s walk, yoke walk, or sandbag or keg
carries, with regular gym programs potential ly also involving Zercher
carries (using a barbel l held across the elbows on the upper
abdominals) or unilateral carries in which the load is held overhead
or by one hip (i.e., suitcase carry). A primary advantage of these
exercises is that they often involve horizontal motion and unilateral
ground contact  and require coordinated activity of many muscles of
the body. Weighted carries may therefore develop total body and
trunk stability, grip strength (for farmer ’s walks) as well as the ability
to produce high levels of anterior –posterior and vertical impulse to
initiate propulsion and to be able to absorb these forces on impact at
heel strike (163). These exercises therefore may mimic performance
in a range of occupational and sporting demands (62, 87) or create
substantial metabolic demands that can be exploi ted in a metabol ic
or anaer obic condi tioning circuit (55, 163). The following exercises
are common weighted carries.
Farmer’s walk:  The farmer ’s walk requires the athlete to
hold a load at the sides in each hand while walking forward
(87, 147). The farmer ’s walk can be performed with static
loads (e.g., farmer ’s bar handles or a heavy dumbbel l) or
variable loads (e.g., water-filled objects) (147). Regardless of
the type of load used, the farmer ’s walk offers a unique
activation pattern of the core (87), although resear ch in the
scienti fic literature is very limited in supporting the use of this
exercise as a strength and condi tioning tool. Two
biomechanical studies of the farmer ’s walk have been
performed (71, 154). Winwood and colleagues (154)
demonstr ated significantly greater vertical and anterior forces
in the liftoff phase of the farmer ’s walk than the deadl ift, as
well as significantly larger forces and shorter ground contact
times and swing times in the farmer ’s walk than unloaded
1126
walking. Keogh and colleagu es (71) identi fied that compar ed
to slower trials, the fastest trials had significantly greater
stride length and r ate and r educed gr ound contact time.
Yoke walk:  The yoke walk is another common strongman
event whereby a heavy frame is carried on the shoulde rs of
the athlete over a set distan ce. As McGill and colleagues (87)
observ ed significantly greater spinal compr ession forces during
the performance of the yoke walk when compar ed to six other
strongman events, it is likely that this exercise has the
potential to challenge and improve core stability. Howev er, it
must be performed with appropriate loads and technique to
reduce the risk of injury , especial ly since Winwood and
colleagues (154) reported that 213 strongman athletes ranked
this exercise as the second most danger ous strongman lift in
terms of injury risk. Similar to the farmer ’s walk (71), faster
yoke walks were characteriz ed by increased stride length and
stride rate, lower limb range of motion, and reduced ground
contact time (61). Based on the impulse–momen tum
relationship , it would appear that weighted carries (e.g.,
farmer ’s and yoke walks) require the production of high levels
of anterior –posterior and vertical forces over short contact
times, perhaps suggesting some potential to improve
horizontal motion such as acceleration sprinting or initiating
body contact in tackling or blocking opponents in contact or
combat sports.
Sandbag carries: Limited resear ch has exam ined frontal
carries including sandbags and water bags in athletic
populations (22, 60). Calata yud and colleagues (22) compar ed
the muscle activity (anterior deltoid, external oblique, lumbar
erector spinae , and gluteus medius) associated with the
performance of 20-kilogram (44 lb) clean and jerks with either
a barbel l, sandbag, or water bag in 21 male university
students. While no significant differences were observed
between the muscle activity when lifting a barbel l or sandbag,
1127
the water bag version resulted in significantly greater external
oblique, lumbar er ector spinae, and gluteus medius activ ation.
Unilateral carries:  Unilateral carries with the load positioned
overhead (e.g., kettlebel l or dumbbel l) or at the hip via a
kettlebel l, dumbbel l, or farmer’s handle (suitcase carry)
impose a unique frontal plane challenge to the athlete (87).
These carries may be advanced total body exercises that will
improve lateral trunk flexor muscles (e.g., obliques and
quadr atus lumborum) and scapular control, thereby allowing
better lateral stabilization of the spine than more traditional
exercises such as dumbbel l side bends or side planks.
Technique Tips for Weighted Carries
Irrespectiv e of where the load is positioned on the body, the athlete should look to
move in a similar way to normal walking. For example, during the carrying
component of the exercise, the athlete should retain a predominantly neutral and
vertical spinal position with no substan tial hyperextension, flexion, or lateral spinal
flexion. The athlete  should use loads that challenge his or her desired walking
speed, step length, step rate, and ground contact time but are still within his or
her ability to maintain core and total body stability. In order to achiev e this, the
athlete will need to concentr ate on keeping the loads in the same relative position
to his or her center of mass throughou t the carry. To achiev e this, the athlete will
need to stiffen the spine in response  to the likely perturbations these awkward
loads impose on the system during the walking phase. This may require some
breath holding, which can be challengin g due to the high spinal compr essive forces
(especial ly observ ed in the yoke walk) or if the load is positioned on the chest as in
Zercher, sandbag, and keg carries, because such loads can further restrict typical
respiration pat terns.
Kettlebell Training
Recently , strength and condi tioning professionals have become
interested in the use of kettlebell  exercises (11, 23, 83). While
seemingly a new phenomen on, the use of kettlebel ls dates back
hundr eds of years to when they were a popular training method in
various Eastern Bloc countrie s (57). The word kettlebel l comes from
the Russian word girya, which refers to a cast iron cannonbal l with a
1128
handle on it (28). In Western literature the term kettlebel l is used to
refer to a weighted impleme nt consisting of a ball with a handle,
which is pr obably bet ter termed a kettlebal l (28).
Along with the increasing interest in the use of kettlebel l training
has been an increase in the amount of scienti fic inquir y into the
efficacy of using these implements with athletes and gener al
populations. The majori ty of the scienti fic evidence supporting the
use of kettlebel ls highlights their potential usefulness as a tool for
gener al physical or fitness development (38, 65). In these studies,
the most common exercise employed is the kettlebel l swing, which
can be performed with either one or two hands (65, 87, 137). While
kettlebel l swing s appear to have a positive impact on cardiovascular
fitness, it is important to note that this activity does not offer the
same level of cardiovascular benefi t as treadmi ll running or more
traditional aer obic ex ercise (65).
Currently, limited resear ch explor es the efficacy of kettlebel l
training as a strength development tool. When used with clinical and
recreational ly trained populations, kettlebel l training has been
reported to increase muscular strength levels compar ed to no
training (68, 103). Additional ly, when a battery of kettlebel l exercises
(i.e., swings, goblet squats, accelerated swings) is performed across
a six-week training interv ention, there appears to be an increase in
muscular strength and vertical jump performance in recreational ly
trained men (103). Howev er, these strength gains are significantly
lower than those typical ly seen with traditional weightl ifting-based
training methods. Specifically, Otto and colleagues (103) reported
that six weeks of weightl ifting training resulted in a 4% increase in
vertical jump performance, while kettlebel l swings increased jumping
performance by only 0.8%. Additional ly, back squat strength was
increased by 13.6% after six weeks of traditional weightl ifting
training, while the kettlebel l training resulted in only a 4.5% increase
(103).
Based on the contempor ary body of scienti fic knowledge, it
appears that kettlebel ls are probably best used as gener al
1129
preparation exercise and that more traditional training methods such
as weightl ifting are more effective for developing maximal strength
and jumping performance capaci ty. Howev er, further scienti fic
resear ch is needed to develop a better understanding of the role
that k ettlebel ls ma y be able to pla y in the dev elopment of athletes.
Types of Kettlebells
When working with kettlebells, one must consider the type of
kettlebel l, of which there are two: the cast iron (figure 17.9) and the
sport kettlebel l (figure 17.10) (28). The cast iron, or fitness,
kettlebel ls are cast from iron and range in size dependin g on their
weight. The sport or competi tion kettlebel ls are made from steel and
have universal design and measur ements. Specifically, the size of the
kettlebel l does not change regardless of the weight, and the various
weights are indicated by different colors (28). Besides the structur al
differences in the size and dimensions of the cast iron and sport
kettlebel l, the other difference is that the cast iron kettlebel l is less
expensiv e and probably more prevalent in strength and condi tioning
facilities.
FIGURE 17.9  Cast ir on class k ettlebel ls.
1130
FIGURE 17.10  Competi tion k ettlebel ls.
Competition Kettlebell Dimensions
Following ar e the dimensions of competi tion k ettlebel ls (28):
Height : 228 mm (9.0 in. )
Diameter : 210 mm (8.3 in. )
Handle diameter : 35 mm (1.4 in. )
Considerations for Selecting Kettlebells
The first major consider ation in the selection of a kettlebel l is the
type of load provided. The two basic types of kettlebel ls are the fixed
and the adjustable (28). With fixed-loaded kettlebel ls, such as cast
iron or competi tion kettlebel ls, the load stays constant; thus, a set of
kettlebel ls, which range across several loads, is required in order to
provide training variety. Adjustable kettlebel ls are either plate loaded
or shot loaded. In actual ity, a plate-loaded kettlebel l is simply a
handle that is attached to weight plates and is not really a kettlebel l
even though it is classified as one (28). In contrast, a shot-loaded
kettlebel l is a hollow version of the more traditional kettlebel l.
Historical ly, these kettlebel ls were filled with sand, water, lead, and
even mercury (28). If this type of kettlebel l is only partial ly filled, the
shot moves around in the ball, causing an increased training stressor.
While popular  in the early 20th century , especial ly with circus
strongmen such as the famous Arthur Saxon and Eugen Sandow ,
this type of kettlebel l is not popular in contempor ary strength and
condi tioning.
1131
The second consider ation relates to the handle, because it is the
major interface between the athlete and the kettlebel l. With cast iron
kettlebel ls, the handle diameter changes slightly as the weight
increases. For example, a 20-kilogram (44 lb) or heavier kettlebel l
has a handle between 33 (1.3 in.) and 35 (1.4 in.) millimeters; a
smaller kettlebel l may have a smaller handle diameter . Additional ly,
to facilitate the types of exercises that use kettlebel ls, the spacing
between the handle and the top of the ball is standar dized in good
kettlebel ls. Typical ly, the space between the bottom of the handle
and the top of the ball is 55 millimeters (2.2 in.), and the length of
the handle is 186 millimeter s (7.3 in.) (28). With regard to handle
surface, some kettlebel ls come with smooth painted handles; others
have polished steel handles, which have no paint and are basical ly
bare metal. The polished steel handle tends to allow for a better grip
because it holds chalk better and does not get as slippery as painted
or pol ished handles do when athletes sweat on them (28).
Landmine Exercises
The landmine  resistance training device is a useful device for
performing loaded rotational  resistance training exercises (4). The
performance of this exercise involves placing the end of a standar d
Olympic barbe ll (i.e., 20 kg [44 lb]) into a metal cylinder that is
attached to a standar d squat rack or stand- alone base attachment
through a universal joint (4). With this set-up, the barbel l is used as
a lever and is rotated around the fixed end, allowing for loaded
rotational movements to be performed (4). Alternativ ely, if a
purpose-bui lt receptacle is not available, one end of the barbel l can
be placed in contact with the floor at the corner of a wall and a
similar movement pattern can be performed (148). Regardless of the
how the barbel l is anchor ed, additional resistance can be added to
the free end of the barbel l, thus allowing for the application of
variable and multiplanar resistance during rotational movements (26,
80, 167).
1132
Additional ly, the landmine device can be used to perform a variety
of exercises including the landmine row (80), Romanian deadl ift
(RDL) (85), squat (26, 114), press (135), and squat to press (69).
While these exercises have become commonly implemented as part
of the resistance training practices of many athletes (4), there is a
paucity of scienti fic resear ch exploring the actual physiological
impact and efficacy of these exercises. As such, significantly more
resear ch is warranted to understand the unique training stimulus
provided b y landmine ex ercises.
Sled Training
In addition to the training studies incorpor ating sleds as a part of the
condi tioning program, several studies have examined the acute
responses to sled ex ercise (72, 150, 152, 160).
Keogh and colleagues (72) sought to describe the spatiotempor al
characteristics of the heavy sled pull, using six resistance-tr ained
subjects with experience in the heavy sled pull. Participants
performed 3 25-meter (27 yd) sets of sled pulls with 171.2 kilograms
(377 lb), with 3 minutes of rest between sets. Several significant
differences were observ ed between the acceleration (the start
through 5 m [5 yd]) and maximum velocity (20-25 m [22-27 yd])
phases, with average velocity, step length, swing time, and a range
of segm ent and joint angles being significantly greater in the
maximum velocity than acceleration phase. The fastest trials also
had significant ly greater step length, swing times, and trunk and
knee angles at certain positions than slower trials. These acute
responses would potential ly underl ie some of the mechanisms
contributing to the chronic improvements in sprinting performance
seen wi th hea vy sled pul ls (96).
West (150) examined the acute effects of five sets of 2 × 20-
meter (21 yd) reverse sled pulls using loads of 75% of body mass
with 11 resistance-tr ained  men. Participants were retested
immediately , 15 minutes, 1 hour, 3 hours, and 24 hours after
completing the sled pulls. Peak countermo vement jump power was
1133
significantly decreased and blood lactate significantly increased
(peaking at 12.4 mmol/L immediately after) for a period of 1 hour,
with no significant changes in creatine kinase at any time point.
Testoster one and cortisol tended to increase at 15 minutes after
(signi ficant only for testoster one), with no significant changes in the
testoster one-to-cortisol ratio observ ed. Such results suggest that
concentr ated sled pull exercises can produce profound metabol ic
fatigue and short-term hormonal augmentation with no muscle
damage. The relatively quick recovery and lack of muscle damage
(perhaps due to the concentric -dominant nature of this exercise)
may indicate that lower and upper body sled exercises could be a
key component of a resistance training program when athletes’
recovery abilities are particularly challenged, such as when they are
performing large volumes of concurr ent training or competing
several times per week.
Winwood and colleagues (160) and Williams and colleagues (152)
have examined the potential of moder ate to heavy sled pulls to
produce a postactiv ation potentiation enhancement (PAPE) sprinting
effect in adult semi-el ite rugby (75%-150% body mass) and
adolescent high school soccer players (loads producing a velocity
decline of 40%-50% that equated to 66%-70% body mass),
respectiv ely. Some significant PAPE effects were observ ed that
resulted in significant reducti ons in 15-meter (16 yd) sprint times by
Williams and colleagues (152) and Winwood and colleagues (160).
Howev er, the significant PAPE benefi t for Winwood and colleagues
(160) was only observ ed using 75% body mass loads and at 12
minutes after completing the sled pulls. The studies therefore
suggest that sled pulls with loads between 66% and 75% of body
mass have the potential to produce 15-meter sprint PAPE effects in a
variety of running athletes.
1134
Unilateral Training
When employing training methods, one can use unilateral or bilateral
training interv entions. These types of training methods can be
performed with the upper body or lower body, depending on the
targeted outco mes. Common lower body unilateral training exercises
include lunges, step-ups, and the single-leg squat, which is
sometimes referred to as the Bulgarian split squat . This exercise
isolates one leg and is typical ly used in the preparation of athletes
from numer ous sports. Typical ly, these types of exercises are
integr ated into training programs with varying degrees of emphasis
(86) in an attempt to reduce bilateral asymmetries  (75) or as a
rehabi litation tool (37). They are often used to reduce a bilateral
deficit , where asymmetries in force production are observ ed
between unilateral and bilateral movements (67). It has also been
demonstr ated that bilateral movements exhibi t a bilateral
facilitation  in which voluntary activation of the agonist muscle
group increases (12, 117). Trained or stronger individuals tend to
exhibi t a bilateral facilitation, while untrained, injured, or weaker
athletes exhib it a bilateral deficit (14). Therefore, based on the
bilateral facilitation response , trained individuals should not use
unilateral methods as the primary strategy to develop strength. In
contrast, unilateral training methods may be useful for strength
development wi th untr ained, weak er, and injur ed individuals (14).
Trained or stronger individuals exhibit a bilateral
facilitation during bilateral exercises, while untra ined,
injured, or weaker individuals exhibit a bilateral deficit.
1135
Conclusion
In designing strength and condi tioning interv entions, one can use a
variety of methods to apply overload. The use of alternativ e methods
and nontraditional implements is increasing in populari ty. When
choosing to implement these methods, strength and condi tioning
professionals should consider the benefi ts and weaknesses of these
types of training interv ention s. Additional ly, the level of the athlete
dictates whether use of these methods is warranted. For example, a
novice athlete or untrained individual may derive a large benefi t
from doing bodyweight or core stability exercises. Conversely , the
trained or elite athlete may experience greater gains with traditional
ground-based free weight exercises. With the advanced athlete, the
use of variable resistance may also allow for a greater training
stimulus to be applied to traditional training methods. If choosing to
emplo y alternative methods or nontraditional element –based training
methods, strength and conditioning professionals must always
ensur e that they teach proper exercise techniques as well as
constantly monitor their athletes to ensur e that a safe training
environment is maintained.
ALTERNATIVE MODES AND
NONTRADITIONAL EXERCISES
BODYWEIGHT EXERCISES
  1  Front Plank   498
  2  Side Plank   498
  3  Suspension T rainer Chest Pr ess  499
  4  Suspension T rainer I nverted R ow  500
  5  Suspension T rainer Y Pul l  501
1136
CORE STABILITY AND BALANCE TRAINING
EXERCISES
  6  Stability Ball Rollout  502
  7  Stability Ball Pike  503
  8  Stability Ball Jackkni fe  504
STRONGMAN EXERCISES
  9  Tire Flip  505
10  Log Clean and Pr ess  506
11  Yoke Walk  508
12  Sandbag Carry   509
13  Zercher Carry   510
14  Forward Sled Push and Pul l  512
15  Reverse Sled Dr ag  514
OTHER ALTERNATIVE EXERCISES
16  Back S quat Wi th Bands   515
17  Accentuated Ec centrical ly Loaded B ench Pr ess  516
18  Landmine R otation   517
19  Single- Arm Landmine R ow  518
20  Landmine S quat to Pr ess  519
21  Two-Arm K ettlebel l Swing   520
22  Single-Leg S quat   521
23  Single-Leg R omanian Deadl ift (RDL)   522
24  One-Arm Dumbbel l Snatch   523
Bodyweight Exercises
  1  FRONT PLANK
Starting Position
1137
Kneel in a prone, quadruped position on the floor. The feet
should be hip-width apart or slightly closer , with the palms of
the hands flat on the floor shoulder -width apart and the elbows
pointing backw ard.
Drop the elbows to the floor and position them directly under
the shoulders.
Move the feet back one at a time to allow the hips and knees to
extend so the abdomen and the front of the hips and legs rest
on the floor .
Ending Position
Elevate the hips so the ankles , knees, hips, shoulders, and head
are in a str aight l ine.
Isometrical ly hold the torso in a rigid position with the elbows
under the shoulders and the head in a neutr al posi tion.
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
rectus abdominis, internal obliques, external obliques,
erector spinae
1138
  2  SIDE PLANK
Starting Position
Lie on the floor on the left side.
Position the left elbow undern eath the left shoulder with the left
forearm perpendicular to the body .
Stack the right foot on top of the left foot with the right leg
evenly on top of the left leg, or place the right foot on the floor
immediately in front of the left foot. Also, stack the right arm
evenly on top of the right side of the torso .
Position the head in a neutral position with the eyes focused
forward.
Ending Position
Elevate the hips off the floor so the left ankle, knee, hip, and
shoulder ar e in a str aight l ine.
Isometrical ly hold the torso in a rigid position with the left
elbow under the left shoulder and the head in a neutral
position.
Switch and r epeat the pr ocedur e for the right side.
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
internal obliques, external obliques
1139
  3  SUSPENSION TRAINER CHEST
PRESS
Starting Position
Assume a position away from the anchor point while grabbing
the handles of the suspension tr ainer in each hand.
With the elbows extended, move the hands and feet shoulder -
width apart while placing the body into a straight line, or plank
position.
Brace the trunk and slowly step back until there is tension on
the str aps and the body is in an incl ined posi tion.
Movement
Initiate the movement by flexing the elbows and lowering the
chest, simi lar to a push-up .
Ending Position
At the end of the movement the chest should be between the
suspension tr ainer’s handles.
1140
Extend the elbows to r eturn to the starting posi tion.
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
pectoralis major, anterior deltoid, triceps brachii, rectus
abdominis, internal obliques, external obliques, erector
spinae
  4  SUSPENSION TRAINER INVERTED
ROW
Starting Position
Face the anchor point while grabbing the handles of the
suspension trainer with the palms of the hands facing each
other or upw ard.
While maintaining a neutral body position, lean back while
simultaneously allowing the arms to extend in front of the body
until they ar e at or abo ve shoulder height.
Movement
Pull the torso toward the hands by flexing at the elbows and
extending the shoulders. Throughout the movement, maintain a
1141
straight body postur e.
Ending Position
The elbows ar e flex ed, and the hands ar e next to the chest.
Extend the elbows, and lower the torso back to the starting
position.
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
latissimus dorsi, rhomboids, biceps
  5  SUSPENSION TRAINER Y PULL
Starting Position
Face the anchor point while grabbing the handles of the
suspension trainer with the palms of the hands facing each
other.
While maintaining a neutral body position, lean back while
simultaneously allowing the arms to extend in front of the body
until they ar e at or abo ve shoulder height.
Movement
1142
Without flexing the elbows, flex the shoulders while pushing the
hands overhead in a diagonal movement pattern to form a Y
with the arms and body .
Throughout the mo vement, maintain a str aight body postur e.
Ending Position
At the top of the mo vement the arms and body should f orm a Y .
After pausing in this position, slowly lower the body back to the
starting posi tion.
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
latissimus dorsi, rhomboids, trapezius, posterior deltoid
Core Stability and Balance Training
Exercises
  6  STABILITY BALL ROLLOUT
Starting Position
1143
Kneel facing the stability ball with the upper body in an upright
position, the elbows fully extended, and the hands touching the
ball.
While keeping the hands on the ball, create a 90-degr ee angle
at the knees and ankles with the knees, hips, and shoulders in a
near-vertical plane.
Ending Position
Keep the knees and toes on the floor; elbows fully extended;
arms parallel to each other; and knees, hips, and shoulde rs in a
straight l ine.
Extend the knees and flex the shoulders to roll the ball forward
and the arms across the top of the ball until it comes very close
to the f ace.
Isometrical ly hold the torso in a rigid position; do not let the
hips sag tow ard the floor .
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
rectus abdominis, iliopsoas
  7  STABILITY BALL PIKE
Starting Position
Kneel down in f ront of a stabi lity ball.
1144
Position the body f acing a way from the bal l.
In a quadruped position with the hands underneath the
shoulders and the knees extended, place both feet on the
stability ball.
Isometrical ly hold the torso in a rigid position with the elbows
fully extended and the head in a neutr al posi tion.
All repetitions begin f rom this posi tion.
Upward Movement Phase
Keeping the knees and elbow s fully extended and the torso in a
rigid position, begin the exercise by flexing the hips to roll the
ball toward the chest.
Continue lifting the hips until the toes are on top of the ball and
the hips ar e directly o ver the shoulders.
Keep the head in a neutr al posi tion.
Downward Movement Phase
Return to the starting position by allowing the hips to extend
under contr ol.
Keep the knees and elbows fully extended and the torso held
rigid.
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
rectus abdominis, iliopsoas
1145
  8  STABILITY BALL JACKKNIFE
Starting Position
Kneel down in f ront of a stabi lity ball.
Position the body f acing a way from the bal l.
In a quadruped position with the hands underneath the
shoulders and the knees extended, place both feet on the
stability ball.
Isometrical ly hold the torso in a rigid position with the elbows
fully extended and the head in a neutr al posi tion.
All repetitions begin f rom this posi tion.
Forward Movement Phase
Keeping the knees and elbow s fully extended and the torso in a
rigid position, begin the exercise by raising the hips slightly and
flexing the hips and knees to r oll the bal l toward the chest.
Continue rolling the ball forward until the hips and knees are
fully flex ed.
Keep the shoulders over the hands and the head in a neutral
position.
Backward Movement Phase
Return to the starting position by allowing the hips and knees to
extend under contr ol.
Keep the elbows f ully extended and the torso held rigid.
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
rectus abdominis, iliopsoas
1146
Strongman Exercises
  9  TIRE FLIP
Starting Position
Begin f acing the tir e with the f eet hip- to shoulder -width apart.
Squat down and lean into the tire so that the chin and the
anterior deltoids are resting on the tire and the feet are
positioned back f ar enough to maintain a neutr al spine posi tion.
Keeping the arms outside the knees and the elbows fully
extended, gr asp the tir e with a supinated grip .
All repetitions begin f rom this posi tion.
Upward Movement Phase
Begin by extending the knees and hips and plantar flexing the
ankles whi le pushing the tir e forward.
Move forward explosiv ely toward the tire by taking two or three
steps.
Continue this movement until the body is aligned in a 45-degr ee
angle to the tir e.
Consider flexin g the hip and knee of one leg fully to drive the
knee upw ard and tow ard the tir e.
Immediately after striking the tire with the thigh (if done),
reorient the hands into a pr onated grip .
1147
Lean forward and take small steps as required while forcefully
extending the arms to push the tir e over in f ront of the body .
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
gluteus maximus, semimembranosus, semitendinosus,
biceps femoris, vastus lateralis, vastus intermedius, vastus
medialis, rectus femoris, soleus, gastrocnemius, deltoids,
triceps brachii, trapezius
  10  LOG CLEAN AND PRESS
This exercise comes from strongman training and consists  of quickly
and forcefully picking the log up from the ground to the front of the
shoulders and then pressing  it overhead. The log clean consists of
three phases but occurs in two motions, with a pause of the log at
1148
the shoulders. The log can either be cleaned and pressed each
repetition or cleaned once and pr essed f or mul tiple r epetitions.
Starting Position
Stand with the feet placed between hip- and shoulder -width
apart wi th the toes pointed f orward or sl ightly outw ard.
Squat down with the hips lower than the shoulders, and grasp
the log wi th a closed, neutr al grip .
Place the hands on the log handles with the arms slightly
outside of the knees and the elbows f ully extended.
Place the feet flat on the floor, and position the log in front of
the shins and o ver the bal ls of the f eet.
All repetitions begin with the back in a neutral spine position,
scapulae depressed and retracted, head in line with the
vertebr al column, and should ers over or slightly in front of the
log.
Upward Movement Phase: First Pull
Lift the log of f the gr ound b y extending the hips and knees.
Keep the torso-to-floor angle  constant; do not let the hips rise
before the shoulders.
Keep the elbows extended and the shoulders over or slightly
ahead of the log.
Upward Movement Phase: Transition
As the log passes the knees, pull the log into the body by
dropping into a full squat position while ensuring the elbows are
about shoulder height and positioned slightly behind or above
the hands.
Briefly pause in this posi tion wi th the log on the thighs.
Upward Movement Phase: Second Pull
Forcefully jump upward by extending the hips and knees and
plantar flexing the ankles.
1149
Ensur e the log is kept close to the body throughout this phase,
whereby it essential ly rolls up the upper body toward the
shoulders.
Upward Movement Phase: Catch
After the lower body has fully extended, pull the body under the
log and rotate the arms around under the log, similar to the
catch in the power clean.
Simul taneously flex the hips and knees to a quarter - or half-
squat posi tion.
Rack the log across the front of the clavicles and anterior
deltoids.
Preparation Phase: Dip
Flex the hips and knees at a slow to moder ate speed to move
the log in a str aight path down ward.
Continue the dip to a depth not to ex ceed a quarter squat.
Keep the feet flat on the floor, the torso erect, and the upper
arms dir ectly under the log.
Upward Movement Phase: Drive
Immediately on reaching the lowest position of the dip, reverse
the movement by forcefully and quickly extending the hips and
knees and then the elbows to mo ve the log o verhead.
Downward Movement Phase
Lower the log by gradual ly reducing the muscular tension of the
arms to al low a contr olled descent of the log to the shoulders.
Simul taneously flex the hips and knees to cushion the impact of
the log on the shoulders, and then return the log to the floor. If
sufficient drop pads are available, it is possible to drop the log
from overhead to the floor. In order to do this safely, push the
bar slightly forward from the finished overhead position while
retaining some grip on the handles f or a part of the descent.
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
1150
gluteus maximus, semimembranosus, semitendinosus,
biceps femoris, vastus lateralis, vastus intermedius, vastus
medialis, rectus femoris, deltoids, triceps brachii, trapezius
  11  YOKE WALK
Starting Position
Adjust the yoke to a height that would provide sufficient
clearance to walk safely without tripping over it (perhaps 4-6 in.
[10-15 cm] of gr ound clear ance).
1151
Assume a position under the yoke with the bar positioned on
top of the upper trapezius muscles, with the feet positioned
underneath the hips and the rest of the body symmet rically
positioned under the frame. This should look something similar
to the starting position of a partial barbel l back squat, except
that the hands are positioned  on the vertical bars around lower
chest height.
Liftoff and Walking Phase
After strongly bracing the spine, forcibly push the feet into the
ground while pushing the elbows and hands forward into the
vertical bars to bet ter stabi lize the y oke.
While continuing to brace the spine and push the elbows and
hands forward, adopt a walking movement pattern in which the
spine remains vertical; initially focus on performing a series of
short and r elatively fast steps.
While accelerating, increase the length of steps and further
reduce gr ound contact times.
Ending Position
After completing the set distance, flex the hips, knees, and
ankles to lower the f rame car efully to the gr ound.
Maintain a strong braced spinal position to minimiz e the risk of
impact injury .
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
gastrocnemius, soleus, gluteus maximus, rectus femoris,
gluteus medius, erector spinae, internal and external
obliques
  12  SANDBAG CARRY
Starting Position
Adopt a position just behind the center of the sandbag, similar
to the starting posi tion of a barbel l deadl ift.
1152
The sandbag can be positioned length ways in the intended
direction of the carry or positioned across the body. Due to the
width of the sandbag, it may be necessary to rotate the hips
outward, with the elbows inside the knees.
Wedge the fingers under the sides of the sandbag so that the
hands act as hooks under each side of the sandbag.
Liftoff Position
After strongly bracing the spine and ensuring a strong grip on
the sandbag, forcibly push the feet into the ground and row the
sandbag into y our chest.
If the sandbag is quite heavy, transition into a full squat
position. Howe ver, if the sandbag is light to moder ately heavy, it
may be possible to bypass  the full squat position and, via
forceful hip extension, stand up from this position and initiate
the carrying phase.
Full Squat Position
As the sandbag approaches the chest at the end of the liftoff
phase, drop the hips rapidly into a deep squat position so that
the sandbag is tightly held against the chest and resting on the
upper thighs.
Once secur e and balanced in this position, initiate the
concentric phase of the squat movement by vigorously
extending the hip and knee joints while continuing to strongly
pull the sandbag into the chest.
Arms may be kept on the side of or above the sandbag,
depending on personal pr eference.
Carrying Phase
From here, adopt a walking movement pattern, initially focusing
on performing a series of short, fast steps, which will increase
total body balance and stabi lity.
When building up speed, increase the length of the steps and
further r educe gr ound contact times.
1153
Note:  Lean back a little during the walking phase so as not to lose
balance forward due to the sandbag positioned in front of the center
of mass.
Ending Position
After completing the set distance, lean slightly forward and drop
the sandbag to the floor .
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
gastrocnemius, soleus, gluteus maximus, rectus femoris,
gluteus medius, erector spinae, internal and external
obliques
  13  ZERCHER CARRY
Starting Position and Liftoff
The Z ercher carry can begin f rom one of two posi tions.
1. Starting posi tion from bo xes
1154
Position the barbel l on some boxes, anywher e from a full
squat posi tion to standing almost completely upright.
Position the arms under and around the bar with the palms
facing up so that the bar now rests on the inner part of the
elbows and is held closer the upper abdominal region. It
might be easier to maintain  this position by clasping the
hands and k eeping them close to the chest (not shown).
2. Starting posi tion from the floor
Position the barbel l on the floor near the shins with a closed
overhand grip and then perf orm a semi-sumo squat deadl ift.
Once the bar is above the knees, drop into a full semi-sum o
squat position and reposition the arms under and through
the bar so that the bar is on the inner part of the elbows
and contacting the upper abdominal r egion.
While maintaining the position of the bar on the inner elbows and
upper abdomin als, forcibly push the feet into the ground and extend
the knees and hips, now standing upright with the bar kept in the
same r elative posi tion as l iftoff.
Walking Phase
Adopt a walking movemen t pattern, initially focusin g on
performing a series of short, relatively fast steps, which will
increase total body balance and stabi lity.
When building up speed, increase the length of the steps and
further r educe gr ound contact times.
Note:  Lean back a little during the walking phase so as not to lose
balance forward due to the barbell positioned in front of the center
of mass.
Ending Position
After completing the set distance, reset the bar on the boxes by
performing the eccentric phase of a full or partial squatting
motion, depending on the height.
1155
Alternativ ely, if repositioning the bar on the floor, go into a full
squat position, and while resting the bar on the upper thighs,
rotate the arms out from under the bar so that the hands reach
the top of the bar .
From this position, grab the bar with an overhand grip to
partial ly stand upright before replacing the bar on the ground
by perf orming the concentric phase of a deadl ift-type motion.
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
gastrocnemius, soleus, gluteus maximus, rectus femoris,
gluteus medius, erector spinae, internal and external
obliques
1156
  14  FORWARD SLED PUSH AND PULL
Starting Position (Push)
Stand behind the sled and position the hands on the vertical
bars of the prowler at a comfortable height, typical ly
somewher e between hip and knee height in a standing position.
(Note:  The lower the hands are positioned on the prowler, the
more likely this will result in a horizontal trunk and shin
position, which will increase the ability to apply propulsiv e
horizontal f orces and ac celerate the sled. )
Keep the hands closer to the shoulders and elbows near the
hips (shown) or extend the arms forward in front of the body
(not shown), depending on personal pr eference.
1157
If the load is heavy, it is advisable to start with the two feet
positioned together (not shown) to maximiz e the ability to apply
horizontal f orce to ini tiate mo vement of the hea vy sled.
If the load is lighter , it is possible to start in an alternat e split
stance (shown) to bet ter replicate a sprint starting posi tion.
Forward Pushing Phase
While bracing the spine, initiate a stepping pattern that initially
focuses on performing a series of short, relatively fast steps,
which will increase the ability to apply horizontal forces to the
ground.
While building up speed, increase the length of the steps and
further reduce ground contact times. The ability to apply
propulsiv e horizontal forces to the ground can be optimiz ed by
ensuring the front foot is positioned behind the hip throughout
the entir e pushing phase.
Starting Position (Pull)
Stand in front of the sled and attach the sled to the body via a
chest and shoulder harness (shown) or hold separ ate handles in
each hand (not shown).
Regardless of the attachment method to the sled, assume a
position in which the trunk and shin are close to horizontal (not
shown), which will increase the ability to apply propulsiv e
horizontal forces and accelerate the sled. This can be best
achiev ed by placing the hands on the ground (not shown) if
connected via a harness to the sled or by leaning forward (not
shown) i f holding handles in each hand.
If the load is heavy, it is advisable to start with the two feet
positioned together (not shown) to maximiz e the ability to apply
horizontal force to initiate movement of the heavy sled. If the
load is lighter , it is possible to start in an alternate split stance
(shown) to bet ter replicate a sprint starting posi tion.
Forward Pulling Phase
1158
While bracing the spine, initiate a stepping pattern that initially
focuses on performing a series of short, relatively fast steps,
which will increase the ability to apply horizontal forces to the
ground.
While building up speed, increase the length of the steps and
further reduce ground contact times. The ability to apply
propulsiv e horizontal forces to the ground can be optimiz ed by
ensuring the front foot is positioned behind the hip throughout
the entir e pushing phase.
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
gluteus maximus, semimembranosus, semitendinosus,
biceps femoris, vastus lateralis, vastus intermedius, vastus
medialis, rectus femoris, gastrocnemius, soleus
1159
1160
  15  REVERSE SLED DRAG
Starting Position
Stand in front of the sled and attach the sled to the body via a
hip harness (not shown) or hold separ ate handles in each hand
(shown).
Regardless of the attachment method to the sled, lean
backw ard a little while maintaining a relatively extended hip
position, and keep the feet in front of the knees to increase the
ability to apply propulsiv e horizontal forces and accelerate the
sled.
It is advisable to start with the two feet positioned together to
maximiz e the ability to apply horizontal force to initiate
movement of the hea vy sled.
Backward Pulling Phase
Initiate a stepping pattern that initially focuses on performing a
series of short, relatively fast steps, which will increase the
ability to apply horiz ontal f orces to the gr ound.
While building up speed, increase the length of the steps and
further r educe gr ound contact times.
The ability to apply propulsiv e horizontal forces to the ground
can be optimiz ed by ensuring the front foot is typically
positioned in front of the knee throughout the entire pulling
phase.
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
gluteus maximus, semimembranosus, semitendinosus,
biceps femoris, vastus lateralis, vastus intermedius, vastus
medialis, rectus femoris, gastrocnemius, soleus
1161
Other Alternative Exercises
  16  BACK SQUAT WITH BANDS
Band Placement
Loop the ends of long elastic bands around the band pegs of
each side of a power rack. If the rack does not have band pegs,
1162
loop the bands around the handles of heavy dumbbel ls that will
not mo ve during the ex ercise.
Take the other ends of the bands and place them over the ends
of the bar so they rest against the outside of the weight plates
on either side.
The bands should be loose enough that there is no tension at
the bottom of the squat. Tension should be applied to the bar
when the exercise is performed, but at the bottom of the range
of motion, the bands should be slack to apply no load to the
bar. (Note:  Despi te their appear ance, the bands in the second
photo ar e not cr eating an y tension on the bar .)
Starting Position
Grasp the bar wi th a closed, pr onated grip .
Step under the bar and posi tion the f eet par allel to each other .
Place the bar in a balanced position on the upper back and
shoulders; follow the guidel ines for the back squat in chapter 16
regarding the high or low placement of the bar .
Extend the hips and knees to lift the bar off the supporting pins
or ledge, and tak e one or two steps backw ard.
Position the feet shoulder -width apart or wider, even with each
other, and the toes pointed sl ightly outw ard.
Stand with an erect torso by positioning the shoulders back,
tilting the head slightly back, and protruding the chest up and
out to cr eate a neutr al or sl ightly ar ched back.
All repetitions begin f rom this posi tion.
Downward Movement Phase
Begin the exercise by flexin g the hips and knees slowly and
under control while keeping the torso-to-floor angle relatively
constant.
Maintain a flat-foot position with the knees aligned over the feet
as they flex.
1163
Continue flexin g the hips and knees until the thighs are parallel
to the floor, the torso begins to round or flex forward, or the
heels begin to rise of f the floor .
Upward Movement Phase
Raise the bar by extending the hips and knees while keeping
the torso-to-floor angle r elatively constant.
Keep the torso er ect, shoulders back, and chest up and out.
Keep the heels on the floor and the knees al igned o ver the f eet.
Continue exten ding the hips and knees until the body is fully
erect.
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
gluteus maximus, semimembranosus, semitendinosus,
biceps femoris, vastus lateralis, vastus intermedius, vastus
medialis, rectus femoris
1164
  17  ACCENTUATED ECCENTRICALLY
LOADED BENCH PRESS
Note:  This exercise requires the use of weight releasers, which allow
additional load to be applied during the eccentric phase of the
movement. The spotting technique used is identical to that outlined
for the bench pr ess in chapter 16 .
Set-up
Prior to the athlete initiating the movement the spotter should
load the barbel l with the appropriate weight and the weight
releasers ar e attached to the barbel l.
It is important  that the weight releasers are loaded correctly
and placed evenly on the barbell so that they release at the
completion of the down ward movement phase without
disrupting the athlete’ s normal movement pattern. As a gener al
rule, the weight releasers should be set so that they disengage
from the barbel l approximate ly 2 to 4 inches (5-10 cm) before
the completion of the down ward movement (51).
Starting Position
Lie in a supine position on a bench in the five-point  body
contact posi tion.
Place the body on the bench so that the eyes are below the
racked barbel l.
Grasp the barbel l with a closed, pronated grip slightly wider
than shoulder -width apart.
Signal the spotter for assistance in moving the barbel l off the
supports.
Position the barbel l over the chest with the elbows fully
extended.
All repetitions begin f rom this posi tion.
Downward Movement Phase
1165
Lower the barbel l under control to reduce the movement of the
weight r eleasers.
The weight releasers will disengage from the barbel l about 2 to
4 inches (5-10  cm) before touching the chest at approximately
nipple lev el.
Keep the wrists stiff and the forearms perpendicular to the floor
and par allel to each other .
Maintain the fiv e-point body contact posi tion.
Upward Movement Phase
Push the barbel l upward and very slightly backw ard as fast as
possible unti l the elbows ar e fully extended.
Keep the wrists stiff and the forearms perpendicular to the floor
and par allel to each other .
Maintain the fiv e-point body contact posi tion.
Do not ar ch the back or r aise the chest to meet the bar .
At the end of the set, signal the spotter for assistance in racking
the bar .
Keep a grip on the bar unti l it is racked.
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
pectoralis major, anterior deltoids, triceps brachii
  18  LANDMINE ROTATION
Starting Position
Stand facing the free end of the barbel l, then squat down to
grasp the end of the barbel l sleeve with both hands (not
shown) and pick i t up.
After standing, press the free end of the barbel l up to position it
in front of the midline of the body approximately level with the
eyes.
Stand with the feet approximately shoulder -width apart and
knees sl ightly flex ed.
1166
The body weight should be shifted to the balls of the feet but
with the heels r emaining in contact wi th the floor .
Brace the trunk with the head and spine in a neutral position
(4).
Rotate to the Left
Lower the bar by rotating to the left while also allowing the
torso, hips, and back foot (i.e., the foot opposi te the direction of
the bar rotation) to rotate in the same direction of the barbell
(4) (somewhat mor e than what is shown).
Return to the Starting Position
Using a forceful and rapid motion, rotate the bar back to the
starting position while keeping the torso and hips aligned with a
neutral head posi tion.
During this motion keep the arms extended and in front of the
torso throughout the rotational elevation of the barbel l while
returning to the starting posi tion (4).
Rotate to the Right
Lower the bar by rotating to the right while also allowing the
torso, hips, and back foot (i.e., the foot opposi te the direction of
the bar rotation) to rotate in the same direction of the barbell
(4) (somewhat mor e than what is shown).
Return to the Starting Position
Using a forceful and rapid motion, rotate the bar back to the
starting position while keeping the torso and hips aligned with a
neutral head posi tion.
During this motion keep the arms extended and in front of the
torso throughout the rotational elevation of the barbel l while
returning to the starting posi tion (4).
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
rectus abdominis, obliques, erector spinae
1167
1168
  19  SINGLE-ARM LANDMINE ROW
Setup and Starting Position
While standing facing away from the axis of rotation of the
landmine barbel l, assume a hip-width stance with the unfixed
side of the barbell just outside of the working-side leg with the
toes behind the barbel l sleev e.
While maintain ing a 25- to 45-degr ee knee angle, hinge at the
hips until able to grasp the end of the barbel l with one hand
while the elbow is extended and reaching down ward. In this
position the forward trunk inclination should be roughly 30 to
60 degrees relative to the ground. This trunk angle should
remain constant thr oughout the mo vement (80).
Upward Movement Phase
The upward movement phase (i.e., concentric phase) is initiated
from the starting position and ends at the top position where
the barbell reaches the greatest angle relative to the floor and
contacts the torso .
Throughout this motion remain stationary with an
approximately neutral axial alignment while simultaneously
retracting the shoulder girdle, extending the glenohumer al joint,
and flexing the elbow to pull the barbel l along the natural arc of
the landmine barbel l device (80).
Downward Movement Phase
Allow the shoulder girdle to protract, the glenohumer al joint to
flex, and the elbow to exten d simultaneously to return to the
starting posi tion (80).
Note:  As part of a balanced training program, this movemen t is
performed on both sides of the body .
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
1169
latissimus dorsi, trapezius, teres major, posterior deltoid,
triceps brachii, rhomboids, brachioradialis, biceps brachii,
brachialis
  20  LANDMINE SQUAT TO PRESS
Setup and Starting Position
1170
Stand facing the axis of rotation of the landmine barbel l with a
slight forward lean, while assuming a shoulder -width stance
with the knees slightly flexed and grasping the end of the bar
with one hand.
The bar should be positioned about 4 to 6 inches (10.2-15.2
cm) away from the shoulder of the arm that is holding the bar
(135). The other arm is held out to the side of the body and
used f or balance during the ex ercise.
Downward Movement Phase
Begin the exercise by flexin g the hips and knees slowly and
under control while keeping the torso-to-floor angle relatively
constant.
Maintain a flat-foot position with the knees aligned over the feet
as they flex.
Continue flexin g the hips and knees until the thighs are parallel
to the floor, the torso begins to round or flex forward, or the
heels begin to rise of f the floor .
Upward Movement Phase
Extend the hips and knees while keeping the torso-to-floor
angle r elatively constant.
Keep the torso er ect, shoulders back, and chest up and out.
Keep the heels on the floor and the knees al igned o ver the f eet.
Continue extending the hips and knees; as the fully-standing
position is reached, press the bar up and slightly forward until
the elbow of the arm holding the bar is fully extended; full knee
and elbow extension should be attained at about the same
time.
Return to the Starting Position
Keeping the lower body and torso stationary , slowly lower the
bar in a controlled manner until it is returned to the starting
position.
1171
Note:  As part of a balanced training program, this movemen t is
performed on both sides of the body .
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
gluteus maximus, semimembranosus, semitendinosus,
biceps femoris, vastus lateralis, vastus intermedius, vastus
medialis, rectus femoris, deltoid (anterior, medial, and
posterior), trapezius, triceps brachii
1172
1173
  21  TWO-ARM KETTLEBELL SWING
Starting Position
Stand with feet flat and placed between hip- and shoulder -width
apart with the toes pointed straight ahead, straddling a
kettlebel l.
Squat down with the hips lower than the shoulders and grasp
the kettlebel l with a closed, pr onated grip .
Place the hands on the kettlebell with index fingers touching or
close together , inside of the legs, keeping the elbows fully
extended.
Position the body with the back in a neutral spine position,
shoulders retracted and depressed, feet flat on the floor, and
eyes focused str aight ahead or sl ightly upw ard.
Maintain a neutral spine or normal lordotic position while flexing
the hips and knees to approximately a quarter -squat position,
with the k ettlebel l hanging at arm’ s length between the thighs.
All repetitions begin f rom this posi tion.
Backward Movement Phase
Begin the exercise by flexing  at the hips to swing the kettlebel l
between the legs.
Keep the knees in a moder ately flexed position with the back
neutral and the elbows extended.
Keep swinging the kettlebel l backw ard until the torso is nearly
parallel to the floor and the kettlebel l is past the vertical line of
the body .
Forward and Upward Movement Phase
When the backward swing reaches its end point, reverse the
movement by extending the hips and knees to move the
kettlebel l in an upw ard arc.
1174
Allow momentu m to raise the kettlebel l to eye level, keepin g the
elbows extended and the back in a neutr al spine posi tion.
Downward and Backward Movement Phase
Allow the kettlebel l to drop into the downswing; flex the hips
and knees to absorb the weight. Keep the elbows fully extended
and the back neutr al.
Continue the down ward-then-backw ard movement until the
kettlebel l passes under then behind the body, then begin the
upward movement phase f or the next r epetition.
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
gluteus maximus, semimembranosus, semitendinosus,
biceps femoris, vastus lateralis, vastus intermedius, vastus
medialis, rectus femoris
1175
  22  SINGLE-LEG SQUAT
Note:  The single-leg squat is not typical ly done with a spotter. If
spotting is needed, two spotters are used with one on each side of
the bar. The positions of the spotters are not pictur ed in order to
show the athlete’ s position at the various stages of the single-leg
squat mor e clearly .
Starting Position: Athlete
Grasp a barbel l with a closed, pronated grip (for dumbbel l
variation, hold dumbbel ls with a closed, neutral grip with a
dumbbel l in each hand).
Stand in front of a bench or box that is approximately knee
height wi th the f eet appr oximately shoulder - to hip- width apart.
Facing away from the bench or box, take a moder ate step
forward with one leg and place the instep of the back foot on
top of the bench or bo x.
Allow both knees to be slightly flexed, with the torso in a nearly
erect position and the shoulders held back and chest up and
out.
All repetitions begin f rom this posi tion.
Starting Position: Two Spotters
The spotters should stand erect at opposi te ends of the bar with
the feet hip- width apart and the knees sl ightly flex ed.
Hold the hands 2 to 3 inches (5-8 cm) below the end of the bar .
Note:  If dumbbel ls are used, no spot ter is needed.
Downward Movement Phase: Athlete
Flex the hip and knee of the forward leg simultaneou sly to
lower the body in a vertical plane while keeping the torso-to-
floor angle constant.
Keep the heel of the forward foot flat on the floor and the
instep of the back f oot on top of the bench or bo x.
1176
Continue flexin g the hip and knee until the front thigh is
approximately par allel to the floor .
Downward Movement Phase: Two Spotters
Keep the cupped hands close to but not touching the bar as it
descends.
Slightly flex the knees, hips, and torso to keep a neutral spine
position when f ollowing the bar .
Upward Movement Phase: Athlete
Raise the bar under control by actively extending the forward
hip and knee; extend the other hip and knee also to keep the
torso-to-floor angle constant.
Maintain a neutr al spine posi tion and k eep the torso upright.
Keep the f orward knee al igned o ver the f orward foot.
Do not flex the torso f orward or r ound the spine.
Continue exten ding the hip and knee of the forward leg to
reach the starting posi tion.
Repeat for the desired numb er of repetitions and then switch
the forward leg.
Upward Movement Phase: Two Spotters
Keep cupped hands close to but not touching the bar as it
ascends.
Slightly extend  the knees, hips, and torso and keep the back
neutral when f ollowing the bar .
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
gluteus maximus, semimembranosus, semitendinosus,
biceps femoris, vastus lateralis, vastus intermedius, vastus
medialis, rectus femoris
1177
  23  SINGLE-LEG ROMANIAN DEADLIFT
(RDL)
1178
Note:  This exercise can be performed with the weight held in the
hand of the same side of the body as the support leg (ipsilateral) or
in the hand of the opposi te side of the body as the support leg
(contr alater al). The description and the photos describe the
contralater al single-leg RDL.
Starting Position
With the right hand, grasp a dumbbel l or kettlebel l with a
closed, pr onated grip .
Stand on the left leg (as the support leg) with the hips and
shoulders o ver the left f oot.
Hold the dumbbel l or kettlebell in front of the right thigh with
the right elbow fully exten ded and the right foot slightly
stagger ed back.
All repetitions begin f rom this posi tion.
Downward Movement Phase
Allow the left support knee to flex until it reaches a mode rately
flexed position, and then rigidly hold that position throughout
the mo vement.
Begin the exercise by allowing the torso to flex forward at the
hip of the left support leg.
Keep the right shoulder , hip, knee, and ankle in one line as the
torso flex es forward.
Keep the back neutr al and the right elbow sti ll fully extended.
Lower the dumbbel l or kettlebell until the torso and right leg are
approximately par allel to the floor .
Upward Movement Phase
Extend the hip of the left support leg to return to the starting
position.
Do not hyperextend the torso or flex the elbow holdin g the
dumbbel l or kettlebel l.
Repeat for the desired numb er of repetitions and then switch
the support leg.
1179
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
gluteus maximus, semimembranosus, semitendinosus,
biceps femoris
  24  ONE-ARM DUMBBELL SNATCH
Starting Position
Straddle a dumbbel l and place the feet between hip- and
shoulder -width apart wi th the toes pointed sl ightly outw ard.
Squat down with the hips lower than the shoulders; grasp the
dumbbel l with a closed, pronated grip and the elbow fully
extended.
All repetitions begin with the back neutral or slightly arched,
scapulae depressed and retracted, and chest held up and out.
The head is in line with the vertebr al column or slightly
hyperextended and the body’s weight balanced between the
1180
middle and balls of the feet with feet flat on the floor. The eyes
are focused straight ahead or slightly upward. The shoulders of
the hand that is holding the dumbbel l should be placed over or
slightly in f ront of the dumbbel l.
Upward Movement Phase
Begin the exercise by extending the knees, hips, and ankles
forcefully to ac celerate the dumbbel l.
The dumbbell should slide up the thigh or remain very close to
the thigh as i t accelerates upw ard.
Keep the elbow of the arm holding the dumbbel l fully extended
as the knees, hips, and ankles ar e extending.
Once the knees, hips, and ankles reach full extension, rapidly
shrug the shoulder of the arm holding the dumbbel l.
As the shoulder reaches its highest elevation, flex the elbow
holding the dumbbel l and k eep it close to the torso .
Keep the arm that is not holding the dumbbel l on the opposi te
hip or held to the side.
Continue pul ling the dumbbel l as high as possible.
Catch Phase
Pull the body under the dumb bell by rotating the arm and hand
holding the dumbbel l around then under the dumbbel l and by
flexing the hips and knees to approximately a quarter -squat
position.
Once the arm holding the dumbbel l is under the dumbbell,
extend the elbow quickly to push the dumbbel l up and the body
down ward under the dumbbel l.
Catch the dumbbel l in full extension at the same time the body
reaches the quarter -squat posi tion.
Keep the arm that is not holding the dumbbel l on the opposi te
hip or held to the side.
After gaining control and balance, stand up to a fully erect
position.
1181
Downward Movement Phase
Slowly allow the dumbbel l to lower to the shoulder , then the
thigh, and finally to the floor between the feet using a squatting
movement.
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
rectus femoris, vastus medialis, vastus lateralis, vastus
intermedius, gluteus maximus, semimembranosus,
semitendinosus, biceps femoris, deltoids, trapezius
KEY TERMS
accentuated ec centric loading (AEL)
accommodating r esistance
alternativ e modes
anatomical cor e
anterior cruciate l igament (ACL)
augmented ec centric loading
1182
axial sk eleton
bilateral asymmetries
bilateral defici t
bilateral facilitation
bodyweight tr aining
chains
constant external r esistance
core
farmer ’s walk
ground-based f ree weight ex ercises
isolation ex ercises
kettlebel l
landmine
log lift
logs
machine-based tr aining
muscle activ ation
nontraditional implement
resistance bands
sandbag carries
sticking point
strongman tr aining
suspension tr aining
unilateral carries
Valsalv a maneuv er
variable r esistance
weighted carries
yoke walk
STUDY QUESTIONS
  1.  What is the most common injury associated wi th tire flipping?
  a.  rotator cuf f tear
  b.  biceps tear
  c.  lower back str ain
1183
  d.  hamstring str ain
  2.  Which of the following statements about kettlebel l training is
most ac curate?
  a.  K ettlebel l training is pr oven to be mor e effective than
traditional weightl ifting f or str ength dev elopment.
  b.  Ther e is extensiv e resear ch demonstr ating the ef ficacy of
kettlebel l training as a str ength dev elopment tool.
  c.  Most of the scienti fic evidence supporting the use of
kettlebel ls highl ights their potential usef ulness f or gener al
physical or fi tness dev elopment.
  d.  K ettlebel l training is not appr opriate f or clinical or
recreational ly trained populations.
  3.  What is a potential solution to the limitation of resistance in
suspension tr aining?
  a.  wearing a weighted v est
  b.  using mul tiple anchor points
  c.  perf orming ex ercises on one leg instead of two
  d.  incorpor ating ply ometric mo vements
  4.  What is the recommended percentage of body mass for AEL
when trying to enhance performance during the conce ntric
phase of a ply ometric jumping ex ercise?
  a.  5%-10%
  b.  10%-20%
  c.  20%-30%
  d.  30%-40%
  5.  What is bi lateral facilitation?
  a.  the tendency f or str onger individuals to perf orm bet ter in
sports that r equire unilateral mo vements
  b.  an incr ease in v oluntary activ ation of the agonist muscle
group during bi lateral mo vements
  c.  the use of r esistance tr aining equipment that al lows f or
both uni lateral and bi lateral exercises
1184
  d.  an injury r ehabi litation pr otocol that f ocuses on
strengthening both l imbs equal ly
1185