# Section 18.1

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 18: Program Design for Resistance Training

**Section:** 18.1 -- Step 1: Needs Analysis

**PDF Pages:** 1186--1195

CHAPTER  18
PROGRAM DESIGN FOR
RESISTANCE TRAINING
Timothy J. Suchomel, PhD, and Paul Comfort, PhD
The authors would like to acknowledge the significant contributions of Jeremy M. Sheppar d, N. Travis
Triplett, Thomas R. B aechle, R oger W . Earle, and Dan W athen to this chapter .
After completing this chapter, you will be able to
evaluate the r equirements and char acteristics of a sport and assess an
athlete f or the purpose of designing a r esistance tr aining pr ogram;
select ex ercises based on t ype, speci ficity, technique experience,
equipment a vailability, and time a vailability;
determine tr aining f requency based on tr aining status, sport season (i.e. ,
phase of the season), load, ex ercise type, and other concurr ent ex ercise;
arrange ex ercises in a tr aining session ac cording to their t ype;
determine 1-r epetition maximum (1RM), pr edicted 1RM f rom a mul tiple
RM, and RM loads;
assign load and r epetitions based on the tr aining goal;
know when and b y how much an ex ercise load should be incr eased;
assign tr aining v olumes ac cording to the athlete’ s training status and the
training goal; and
determine r est period lengths based on the tr aining goal.
Effective training programs involve the coordination of many variables in a
sequential and systematic fashion that enables the body to appropriately adapt
to specific exercise stimul i and subsequently improve performance. Having a
basic understanding of the physiological responses to various training stimul i is
essential for the strength and condi tioning professional to be able to coordinate
the various training aspects  successfully. When focusing on the resistance
1186
training component of a compr ehensiv e training program, it is helpful to
approach the task one program element at a time, keepin g in mind the primary
principles of anaer obic ex ercise pr escription.
1187
Principles of Anaerobic Exercise Prescription
Resistance training programs for athletic populations require attention to the
principles of specificity, overload, progression, variation, reversibility, and
individual ization. One of the most basic concepts to incorporate in all training
programs is specificity . The term, first suggested by DeLorme in 1945 (39),
refers to the method whereby an athlete is trained in a specific manner to
produce a specific adaptatio n or training outcome. In the case of resistance
training, specificity refers to aspects such as the muscles involved, the muscle
action (e.g., concentric, eccentric, and isometric), and the movement velocity
and coordination (i.e., movement pattern; this does not mean replicating specific
sporting movements), but it does not always reflect the combination of all these
aspects. Importantly , it does not mean that all aspects  of the training must
directly mimic that of the sporting skill. For example, a squat movement is
relevant to the vertical jump because it involves overcoming resistance in a
similar movement pattern (e.g., combined knee and hip flexion followed by
forceful knee and hip extens ion) and engages muscles (i.e., predominantly the
knee and hip extensors) that are involved in the vertical jump, yet the speed of
movement and force application are dispar ate between the squat and vertical
jump. Sometimes used interchangeably with specificity is the acronym SAID ,
which stands for specific adaptation to imposed demands.  The underlyi ng
principle is that the type of demand placed on the body dictates the type of
adaptation that will occur. For instance, athletes training for power in high-speed
movements (e.g., basebal l pitch or tennis serve) should attempt to activate or
recruit the same motor units required by their sport at the highest velocity
possible (160, 163). Additional ly, specific improvements  in force and velocity
characteristics may occur following heavy or ballistic resistance training, with
greater improvements in power production occurring in response to strength
training targeting increases in maximal strength in weak athletes (26, 28, 29).
Specificity also relates to the athlete’ s sport season. As an athlete progresses
through the preseason, in-season, and postseason, all forms of training should
gradual ly progress in an organized manner from general to specific (159).
Although participation in the sport itself provides the greatest opportuni ty to
improve performance in the sport, the proper application of the specificity
principle certainly increases the likelihood that other training will also positively
contribute to performance via the transference of training adaptations in the
gym to the sport -speci fic ski lls.
Overload  refers to the application of a training stimulus that exceeds what
the athlete is accustomed to (i.e., increased load, sets, or repetitions [i.e.,
volume]) and produces an adaptation beyond the baseline abilities of the
1188
athlete. Without an overload stimulus, even an otherwise well-designed program
greatly limits an athlete’ s ability to make improvements. The obvious application
of this principle in the design  of resistance training programs involves increasing
the loads assigned in the exercises, especial ly if the primary training goal is to
improve maximal strength. Other more subtle changes  include altering the
number of training sessions per week (or per day in some instances) or
increasing training volume  by adding exercises or sets, which may preferential ly
stimulate a hypertr ophic response (96, 143). Alternativ ely, varying exercise
choice, modifying rest period s between sets and exercises, or any combination
of these can result in an overload. The basis of the overload principle is to
provide the body with a unique training stimulus to facilitate the development of
the desired adaptations. Although an overload stimulus is typical ly thought of as
an increase of a given training variable (e.g., load, volume, velocity ), a
reduction in these variables may also provide the opportuni ty for adaptation to
take place. For example, a reduction in intensi ty (i.e., relative load) allows for an
increase in the speed of a movement, thus facilitating the development of rapid
force productio n characterist ics (i.e., speed–str ength). Alternativ ely, a reduction
in training volume while maintaining (or increasing) intensi ty during a deload
week may lead to an enhan cement in performance (figure 18.1) if a sufficient
stimulus (i.e., volume and intensi ty) has been applied previously . When the
overload principle is properly and systematical ly applied, and all other
components of training are consider ed (e.g., skill-based technical and tactical
training, condi tioning, and external stressors), overtraining can be avoided and
the desir ed training adaptation wi ll occur.
1189
FIGURE 18.1 Example of changes in fatigue and performance (i.e., fitness-f atigue paradigm) across a
mesocy cle with a deload week. As the volume load increases across the first three weeks; some
accumulation of fatigue occurs. Only once there is a reduction in volume load, during the deload week,
does the incr eased perf ormance mani fest.
If a training program is to continue producing higher levels of performance,
the intensity or volume (i.e., overload) of training must continue to provide a
unique stimulu s. Progression , when applied properly , with loading or volume
being sequenti al and specific to the desired adaptiv e response, promotes long-
term training benefi ts. Although it is customary to focus only on the resistance
used (i.e., intensi ty), one can progressively increase training volume by raising
the number of weekly training sessions, adding more drills or exercises to each
session, increasing the number of sets performed, or changing the type or
technical requirements of the drills or exercises. For example, an athlete may
progress from the front squat  and clean grip shoulder shrug to learning the hang
power clean and eventual ly the power clean through the use of a sequential
application of various training exercises that segment the key positions
associated with the lift (21). A key factor governing how training progression is
applied is that it must be based on the athlete’ s training needs and training
status and it needs to be introduced systematical ly and gradual ly. It is also
worth noting that progressively increasing volume tends to emphasiz e
hypertr ophic adaptations, whereas increasing intensi ty emphasiz es strength-
related adaptations (35, 97 , 125, 144).
1190
Variation  within resistance training programs focuses on removing lineari ty
by manipulating overload and specificity to promote the desired adaptations. For
example, strength and condi tioning professionals may introduce variation into a
training program by modifying volume, intensi ty, set configur ation, rest periods,
and exercise selection to provide a novel overload stimulus. These modifications
to a training program may help reduce training monoton y while also potential ly
reducing fatigue and providing a range of training stimul i. Regarding training
intensi ty, strength–power characteristics have been developed within training
programs that include more variation compar ed to prescribing constant
repetition ranges with a greater or fewer number of sets and training or not
training to failure (121, 195, 196). Moreover, it has been suggested that maximal
and rapid force production may be improved to a greater extent using a
combination of heavy and light training intensi ties compar ed to performing only
one loading method (68, 118, 189).
Strength and condi tioning professionals can add variation to a training
program at both the macro and micro level in several ways. At the macro level,
implementing a periodiz ed training plan may help develop specific fitness
characteristics (e.g., hypertr ophy, strength, and power) at different times
throughout the training year. This in turn may provide athletes with a variety of
training stimul i and potential ly enhance the adaptations in subsequent training
phases. Within each phase of training strength and condi tioning professionals
can make micro-level adjustments and add variation by modifying training
intensi ties and exercise selection, thereby reducing training monoton y and
offering unique tr aining stimul i.
As mentioned previously , the introduction of an overload stimulus is meant to
promote the development of a desired fitness characteristic. Howev er, the
removal or reduction of a training stimulus or the involution from monotonous
training and poor fatigue management may cause the opposi te to occur; this
deterior ation or loss of fitness characteristics refers to the principle of
reversibility . An example of the deterior ation of a fitness characteristic after
the removal of a training stimulus is the reduction in rapid force production that
may occur during a higher volume phase focused on improving muscle
hypertr ophy (98, 164). Howev er, the opposi te may also occur because a loss in
muscle size (i.e., muscle atrophy) may occur when training volume is reduced
during a taper (7, 188). As such, reversibility may be consider ed a product of
programming variation because different fitness characteristics are emphasiz ed
during various times throughout the training year. Regarding involution, a
plateau or decreased performance may result because of a lack of mechanical
variation (52) or appropriate loading (176). For examp le, maximal strength
adaptations may plateau if a similar training program with small progressions in
1191
loading is prescribed for longer than six weeks (186). Involution related to poor
fatigue manag ement may be the product of nonfunctional overreaching without
the inclusion of proper recovery, howev er (54, 55). While the loss of fitness
characteristics could be mitigated by incorpor ating retaining loads (i.e., small
percentage of overall training volume focused on maintaining a desired
characteristic) (42), it is important that strength and condi tioning professionals
understand the difference between retaining loads and the minimal effective
dose needed to maintain or dev elop a fi tness char acteristic.
The training goals and needs of each athlete are unique and should therefore
command a training program suited specifically for them; this training principle is
termed individualization . Athletes competing in different sports, the same
sport, or in different events come with different genetic characteristics and
training histories that affect how they respond to various training stimul i. As
such, strength and condi tioning professionals should always avoid a cookie
cutter approach to designing training programs and should instead focus on
providing individual ized training programs that help each athlete reach their
training goals. While this may seem simplistic, it is import ant to note that many
aspects of different training  programs may be similar or even identical. For
example, general strength characteristics for the lower body may be addressed
by prescribing one of many core exercises such as the back squat, leg press,
hex-bar deadl ift, and so on (figure 18.2); howe ver, a training program focused
on this fitness characteristic will likely have more than one lower body exercise,
and thus the likelihood of overlap between programs is high. Taking this into
consider ation, strength and condi tioning professionals may find that 80% to
90% of the exercises used in a training program are similar for multiple athletes,
while 10% to 20% of the exercises will be individual ized. It is important to note
that the loads programmed for these exercises are always individual ized to each
athlete’ s capabi lities.
1192
FIGURE 18.2 Exercise selection flow chart for lower body (a) strength and (b) power . Note:  The
displa yed ex ercises ar e examples and do not comprise an exhaustiv e list.
Designing a resistance training program is a complex process that requires
the recogni tion and manipulation of seven program design variables (referred
to in this chapter as steps 1  through 7).
This chapter discusses each variable in the context of three scenarios that
enable the strength and condi tioning professional to see how training principles
and pr ogram design guidel ines can be integr ated into an o verall program.
1. Needs analysis
2. Exercise selection
3. Training f requency
4. Exercise or der
5. Training load and r epetitions
6. Volume
7. Rest periods
Athlete Scenarios
The three scenarios include a basketball center (scenario A) in her in-season, an American footbal l offensive
lineman (scenario B) during his off-season, and a cross country runner (scenario C) during his preseason. It
is understood that in each scenario , the athlete is well condi tioned for his or her sport, has no
musculosk eletal dysfunction, and has been cleared for training and competi tion by the sports medicine
staff. The athletes in scenarios A (basketball center) and B (American footbal l lineman) have been
resistance training since high school, are accustomed to lifting heavy loads, and are skilled in machine and
free weight exercises. The high school cross country runner in scenario C, in contrast, began a resistance
training program in the preseason only four weeks ago, so his training is limited, and his exercise technique
skills are not wel l developed.
1193
Scenario A Scenario B Scenario C
Sex Female Sex Male Sex Male
Age 20 years old Age 28 years old Age 17 years old
Sport Collegiate bask etballSport Professional American
footbal lSport High school cr oss country
running
Position Center Position Offensive lineman Position (Not appl icable)
Season Beginning of the in-
seasonSeason Beginning of the of f-
seasonSeason Beginning of the
preseason
1194
Step 1: Needs Analysis
The strength and condi tionin g professional’ s initial task is to perform a needs
analysis , a two-stage process that includes an evaluation of the requirements
and char acteristics of the sport and an assessment of the athlete.
Evaluation of the Sport
The first task in a needs analysis is to determine the unique characteristics of
the sport, which includes the gener al physiological and biomechanical profile,
common injuries and mechan isms of injury , and position-speci fic attributes. This
information enables the strength and condi tioning professional to design a
program specific to those requirements and characteristics. Although this task
can be approached in several ways, it should at least include consider ation of
the following at tributes of the sport (50, 128):
Body and limb movement patterns and muscular involvement
(movement analysis )
Strength, power , hypertr ophy, and muscular endur ance priorities
(physiological analysis )
Common sites for joint and muscle injury and causativ e factors (injury
analysis ), especial ly for non-contact injuries
Other characteristics of a sport—such as cardiovascular endur ance, speed,
agility, and flexibi lity requirements—should also be evaluated. This chapter ,
howev er, focuses only on the physiological outcomes that specifically relate to
resistance training program design: strength, power , hypertr ophy, and muscular
endur ance.
For example, a movement analysis of the shot-put field event reveals that it is
an all-body movement that begins with the athlete in a semi-cr ouched stance,
with many joints flexed and adducted, and culminates in an upright stance with
many joints extended and abducted. The most heavily recruited muscles (not in
order) are the elbow extensors (triceps brachii), shoulder abductors (deltoids),
hip extensors (gluteals, hamstrings), knee extensors (quadriceps), and ankle
plantar flexors (soleus, gastrocnemius). Physiological ly, shot putting requires
high levels of strength and power for a successful performance. Also, enhanced
muscular hypertrophy may be advantageous since the muscle’ s potential to
produce force increases as its cross-sectional area becomes greater (81, 102).
The muscular endur ance requirement is minimal, howev er. Due to the repetitive
nature of training and competi tion, the muscles and tendons surrounding the
shoulder and elbow joints tend to be injur ed due to o veruse (192).
1195