# Section 18.3

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 18: Program Design for Resistance Training

**Section:** 18.3 -- Step 3: Training Frequency

**PDF Pages:** 1206--1215

select exercises to accommodate technique, mobility, and injury -related
consider ation.
FIGURE 18.6 Recommended loading ranges to emphasiz e speed–str ength, strength–speed, or gener al
power development using weightl ifting exercises and their derivatives. Red shading illustrates the primary
loading emphasis for the exercises, whereas blue shading illustrates loading, which is likely to be less
effective at enhancing the specific strength characteristic. Loads are based on the 1RM for the power clean,
power snatch, or the o verhead deriv ative, as appr opriate.
Adapted by permission from P. Comfort, G.G. Haff, T.J. Suchomel, et al., “National Strength and Conditioning Association Position
Statement on Weightlifting for Sports Performance,” Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research 37, no. 6 (2023): 1168.
Movement Analysis of the Sport
In the needs analysis (step 1), the strength and condi tioning professional has
identi fied the unique requirements and characteristics of the sport. The exercises
selected for a resistanc e training program that focus on condi tioning for a
particular sport need to be relevant to the activities of that sport in their body
and limb movement patterns, joint ranges of motion, and muscles involved and
muscle actions. The exercises should also create muscular  balance to reduce risk
of injury from disproportionate training. For example, the hamstrings serve as
knee flexors and hip exten sors, while the quadriceps  are knee extensors.
Resear chers have shown that the muscle activation of the hamstrings and
1206
quadriceps may vary based on the exercises that are chosen (101, 153, 190).
Thus, it is up to the strength  and condi tioning profession al to understand how
each exercise may affect muscular development and to prescribe exercises
accordingly based on the needs of his or her athletes.
Sport-Specific Exercises
The more similar the training activity is to the actual sport movement, the
greater the likelihood that there will be a positive transfer to that sport (i.e.,
dynamic correspondence) (160, 165). This is the specificity concept, sometimes
confused with the SAID principle. Arguably the SAID principle is more important
than movement specificity; strength and condi tioning professionals need to be
mindf ul of the specific physiological adaptations that are targeted during each
phase of training. Table 18.3 provides examples of resistance training exercises
that relate in varying degrees to the movement patterns of various sports. The
strength and condi tioning professional should find this table helpful when trying
to identi fy sport-speci fic exercises to ensur e dynamic correspondence. For
example, the primary muscles involved in jumping for basketball are the hip and
knee extensors. An athlete can train these muscles by performing the leg press
or back squat, but which exercise is preferable? Certainly , both exercises
strengthen the hip and knee extensors, but because jumping is performed from
an erect body position with balance and weight -bearing forces as consider ations,
the back squat is more relevant to jumping and is therefore preferred over the
leg press (12, 84). Additional ly, full hip extension is achiev ed during a squat and
a jump, but this is not the case for all leg press machines. The weightl ifting
movements and their derivatives are relevant to jumping because of their quick
movement characteristics, thereby applying a high rate of force development
and power output (16, 87).
TABLE 18.3  Examples of Movement-Related Resistance
Training Exercises
Movement pattern Related exercises
Ball dribbl ing and passing Closed-grip bench pr ess, dumbbel l bench pr ess, triceps pushdown, r everse
curl, hammer curl
Ball kicking Unilateral hip adduction and abduction, single-leg squat, f orward step
lunge, leg (knee) extension, leg r aise
Freestyle swimming
(including start and turns)Pull-up, later al shoulder r aise, f orward step lunge, upright r ow, barbel l
pullover, single-leg squat
Vertical jumping (bal listic,
slow S SC)Snatch, power clean, push jerk, back squat, f ront squat, loaded squat jump ,
jump shrug, push pr ess, push jerk
1207
Vertical jumping (ply ometric,
fast SSC)Drop jump , rebound jump , standing cal f raise, seated cal f raise
Racket stroke Flat dumbbel l fly, lunge, bent -over later al raise, wrist curl, wrist extension
Rowing Power clean, clean pul l, snatch pul l, hang high pul l, bent -over row, seated
row, back squat, leg pr ess, deadl ift, stiff-leg deadl ift, good morning
Running, sprinting Snatch, clean, power clean, back squat, f ront squat, f orward step lunge,
step-up , leg (knee) extension, leg (knee) curl, toe r aise (dorsi flexion)
Throwing, pi tching Lunge, single-leg squat, barbel l pullover, overhead triceps extension,
shoulder internal and external r otation
Muscle Balance
Exercises selected for the specific demands of the sport should maintain a
balance of muscular strength  across joints and between opposing muscle groups
(e.g., biceps brachii and triceps brachii). Avoid designing  a resistance training
program that increases the risk of injury due to a dispari ty between the strength
of the agonist , the muscle or muscle group actively causing the movement
(e.g., the quadriceps in the leg [knee] extension exercise), and the antagonist ,
the sometimes  passiv e (i.e., not concentrical ly involved) muscle or muscle group
located on the opposi te side of the limb (e.g., the hamst rings in the leg [knee]
extension exercise). If an imbalance is created or discovered, exercises to
restore an appropriate strength balance need to be selected. For example, if
isokinetic testing reveals that the hamstrings are extremely weak compar ed with
the quadriceps, additional hamstring exercises could be included to compensate
for the imbalance (48). Isokinetic adaptations may be specific to the muscle
actions involved as well as the speeds used during the training protocols (31,
129) and do not transfer effectively to enhanced performance in athletic tasks
(94, 122). Note that muscle balance  does not always mean equal strength,
just a proper ratio of strength, power , or muscular endur ance of one muscle or
muscle gr oup relative to another muscle or muscle gr oup.
Exercise Technique Experience
An important part of the needs analysis described earlier is evaluating the
athlete’ s training status and exercise technique. If there is any question whether
an athlete can perform an exercise with proper techniq ue, the strength and
condi tioning professional should ask the athlete to demonstr ate the exercise. If
the athlete uses incorr ect technique, the strength and condi tioning professional
should provide complete instruction. Often, unskilled individuals are introduced
to machines and free weight assistance exercises because these are consider ed
easier to perform than free weight core exercises due to their lower balance and
coordination requirements (146, 147). Despi te this, one should not assume that
1208
the athlete will perform exercises correctly, even those that are relatively easy to
perform. Thus, a strength and condi tioning professional should provide
appropriate exercise progressions and regressions that are based on each
athlete’ s techn ique and their ability to maintain their technique with heavier
loads. An example of squat progression and regression exercises is displa yed in
figure 18.7.
FIGURE 18.7 Squat progression and regression exercise examples.  Note:  Individual exercises may also
be progressed or regressed using different loads. In addition, advanced athletes may progress the front
squat and back squat using variable resistance training with chains or bands as well as accentuated
eccentric loading.
Availability of Resistance Training Equipment
The availability of training equipment must be consider ed in the selection of
exercises. A lack of certain equipment may necessi tate selecting exercises that
are not as sport specific. For example, the absence of Olympic -type barbel ls with
revolving sleeves would preclude exercises such as the power clean, and an
insufficient supply of barbel l plates may result in substi tuting exercises that do
not require as much resistan ce; for example, the back squat could be replaced
by the f ront squat.
Available Training Time Per Session
The strength and condi tionin g professional should weigh  the value of certain
exercises again st the time it takes to perform them. Some exercises take longer
to complete than others. If time for a training session is limited, exercises that
are more time efficient may need to be given priority over others. For example,
the machine leg press could be selected instead of the free weight lunge to train
the hips and thighs of a 100-meter sprinter . The time required to move the
machine pin to the correct slot in a weight stack and perform 5 repetitions of a
machine leg press is much less than the time required for the lunge exercise, for
which the athlete must load both ends of a bar, attach the locks, back out of the
power rack, establ ish a stable starting position, perform 5 repetitions of each
leg, and rerack the bar. Although the machine leg press is less sport specific, the
1209
time saved may permi t including other exercises or performing more sets. The
benefi t of including the more specific lunge exercise, on the other hand, may be
worth the additional time needed, although this depend s on the goals of the
training session and time a vailable.
Application of the Exercise Selection Guidelines
Refer to the first scenario table on page 528  for a description of the scenario athletes. Ex ercises ar e not
listed in or der of ex ecution.
Scenario A
Female collegiate
basketball player
In-seasonScenario B
Male professional American
football lineman
Off-seasonScenario C
Male high school cross country runner
Preseason
CORE
Push jerk (total body ,
power)a
Hang power clean (total
body, power)a
Jump shrug (total body ,
power)a
Front squat (hip and
thigh)
Romanian deadl ift
(posterior hip and thigh)
Incline bench pr ess
(chest)
Seated r ow (upper back)
Pull-up (back, shoulders,
arms)COREb
Power clean (total body , power)
Tire flipping (total body , power)
Back squat (hip and thigh)
Deadl ift (hip and thigh)
Bench pr ess (chest)
Shoulder pr ess (shoulders)CORE
Hexagonal barbel l deadl ift (hip and thigh)
Lunge (hip and thigh)c
Rear leg–elev ated spl it-squat (hip and
thigh)
Single-leg sti ff-legged deadl ift (posterior
hip and thigh)
Vertical chest pr ess (chest)d
ASSISTANCE
Abdominal crunch
(abdomen)
Single-leg sti ff-legged
deadl ift (posterior hip and
thigh)
Standing cal f raise
(posterior lower leg)ASSISTANCE
Towel-grip pul l-up (f orearm grip)
Abdominal crunch (abdomen)
Step-up (hip and thigh)
Leg (knee) curl (posterior thigh)
Bent-over row (upper back)
Shoulder shrug (upper back and
neck)
Barbell biceps curl (anterior
upper arm)
Lying triceps extension (posterior
upper arm)
Seated cal f (heel) r aise (posterior
lower leg)ASSISTANCE
Abdominal crunch (abdomen)
Leg (knee) curl (posterior thigh)
Lateral shoulder r aise (shoulders)
One-arm dumbbel l row (upper back)e
Toe raise (dorsi flexion) (anterior lower
leg)
Machine back extension (lower back)
Cable hip flexion (hip flex ors)
COMMENTS COMMENTS COMMENTS
1210
aThese ex ercises ar e
included to maximiz e
power and match the
jumping mo vements of
basketball.This athlete has extr a time
available to perf orm mor e
resistance tr aining ex ercises
because sport ski ll practice is not
the first priori ty in the of f-season.
bGreater tr aining f requency
allows mor e core exercises to be
included (see step 3).cAlthough not alw ays consider ed a cor e
exercise, the lunge r ecruits muscles and
joints that ha ve direct appl ication to
running.
dThis ex ercise also in volves the triceps
brachii muscle, so an assistance ex ercise
to isolate the triceps is not needed. This
reduces the time dev oted to the
resistance tr aining portion of the
preseason pr ogram.
eThis ex ercise also in volves the biceps
brachii muscle, so an assistance ex ercise
to isolate the biceps is not needed. This
reduces the time dev oted to the
resistance tr aining portion of the
preseason pr ogram.
1211
Step 3: Training Frequency
Training frequency  refers to the number of training sessions completed in a
given time period. For a resistance training program, a common time period is
one week. When determining  training frequency , the strength and condi tioning
professional should consider the athlete’ s training status, sport season, projected
exercise loads, types of exercises, and other concurr ent training or activities.
When the weekly resistance training volume–load is equated, hypertr ophic
adaptations (142) and strength adaptations (34) are comparable irrespectiv e of
training f requency .
Training Status
The athlete’ s level of preparedness for training, which was determined during
the needs analysis (step 1), is an influential factor in determining training
frequency because it affects the number of rest days needed between training
sessions. Traditional ly, three workouts per week are recommended for many
athletes, because the interv ening days allow sufficient recovery between
sessions. As an athlete adapts to training and becomes better condi tioned, it is
appropriate to consider increasing the number of training days to four and, with
additional training, maybe five, six, or seven (table 18.4), although this depends
on the phase of the competi tive cycle. The gener al guideline is to schedule
training session s to include at least one rest or recovery day—but not more than
three—between sessions that stress the same muscle groups (77); howev er, this
may also depend on the intensi ty of the prescribed exercises. For example, if a
strength and condi tioning professional wants a novice athlete to perform a total
body resistanc e training program two times per week, the sessions should be
spaced out evenly (e.g., Monday and Thursda y or Tuesda y and Friday). If the
athlete trains only on Monday and Wednesda y, the absence of a training
stimulus between Wednesda y and the following Monda y may result in a
decrease in the athlete’ s training status (41, 61, 77), although, for a short time
in well-trained  athletes, one session per week can maintain strength if
appropriate loading strategie s are implemented (41, 61). Examples of training
frequencies of 3 and 4 times  per week using a total body push–pul l format are
presented in table 18.5 .
TABLE 18.4  Resistance Training Frequency Based on Training
Status
1212
Training status Frequency guidelines (sessions per week)
Beginner 2-3
Intermediate 3-4
Advanced* 4-7
*May include mul tiple sessions per da y.
Data f rom Gr aves et al. (1988); Häkkinen et al. (1988); Hof fman et al. (1990).
TABLE 18.5  Examples of Common Total-Body Routines Using
a Push–Pull Emphasis
Training
organizationBody parts or
muscle groups
trainedSample training week Resulting
training
frequency Sun Mon Tues Wed Thurs Fri Sat
Push–pul l Total body RestHeavy
pushRest Heavy
pullRest Light
mixRest 3 times per
week
Push–pul l Total body RestHeavy
pushRest Heavy
pullLight
pushRest Light
pull4 times per
week
More highly resistance-tr ained (intermediate or advanced) athletes can
augment their training by using a split routine  in which different muscle
groups are trained on different days. Training nearly every day may seem to
violate the recommended guidel ines for recovery, but grouping exercises that
train a portion of the body (e.g., lower body or upper body) or certain muscle
areas (e.g., chest, shoulder , and triceps) gives the trained athlete an opportuni ty
to adequately recover between similar training sessions (table 18.6). For
instance, a common lower body–upper body regimen includes four training
sessions per week: lower body on Monda y and Thursda y and upper body on
Tuesda y and Friday (or vice versa). This way, there are two or three days of rest
between each lower or upper body training session, even though the athlete
trains on two consecutiv e days twice a week (80). For split routines with three
distinct training days, the rest days are not on the same day each week. It
should be noted that there are no differences in muscle hypertr ophy or strength
adaptations between split and total body routines when training volume is
equated (131).  Howev er, since volumes may not always be matched in training,
it is possible that a split routine may allow athletes to accumulate a greater
volume–load per muscle group, potential ly benefi ting hypertr ophy and gener al
strength characteristics. Given that athletes may have limited time to train, and
the fact that sports do not isolate specific muscle groups, strength and
condi tioning professionals must determine whether a split routine is appropriate
for their athletes and when and how it could be implemented. For example, an
1213
off-season training program may be an appropriate time to implement a split
routine because this is typical ly the time when athletes may focus on developing
muscle hypertrophy, which has been associated with higher training volumes
(143). In contrast, preseaso n and in-season phases of training may not be
appropriate for split routines given the emphasis on developing maximal and
rapid force production characteristics, reducing training volume and fatigue, and
improving sport -speci fic technical ski lls.
TABLE 18.6  Examples of Common Split Routines
Training
dayBody
parts or
muscle
groups
trainedSample training week
Resulting
training
frequency Sun Mon Tues Wed Thurs Fri Sat
1 Lower
bodyRest Lower
bodyUpper
bodyRest Lower
bodyUpper
bodyRest 4 times
per week
2 Upper
body
1 Chest,
shoulders,
tricepsRest Chest,
shoulders,
tricepsLower
bodyBack,
trapezius,
bicepsRest Chest,
shoulders,
tricepsLower
body5 times
per week*
2 Lower
body
3 Back,
trapezius,
biceps
1 Chest and
backChest
and
backLower
bodyShoulders
and armsRest Chest
and
backLower
bodyShoulders
and arms6 times
per week*
2 Lower
body
3 Shoulders
and arms
*Frequency varies between five times per week and six times per week, depending on the day of the week
that is the first tr aining da y.
Sport Season
Another factor that influence s resistance training frequency is the sport season.
For example, the increased emphasis on practicing the sport skill during the in-
season necess itates a decrease in the time spent in the weight room and,
consequently , reduces the frequency of resistance training (tables 18.4 and
18.7). The problem  is that there simply is not enough time to fit all the desired
1214
modes of training into each day. So even though a well-trained athlete may be
capable of completing four or more resistance training sessions per week, the
other time demands of the sport (i.e., competi tion schedule, technical and
tactical training) may not permi t this. When time is constr ained, the subdivision
of weekly training volume across multiple short-duration bouts, termed
microdosing , has been suggested as a potential ly useful strategy , which may
mitigate the fatigue associa ted with longer duration, higher volume training
sessions (34 , 35).
TABLE 18.7  Resistance Training Frequency Based on the
Sport Season (for a Trained Athlete)
Sport season Frequency guidelines (sessions per week)
Off-season 4-6
Preseason 3-4
In-season 1-3
Postseason (activ e rest) 0-3
Data f rom Stone and O’B ryant (1987); T esch (1992).
Training Load and Exercise Type
The ability to train more frequently may be enhanced by alternating heavier and
lighter training days (42, 166, 177). As shown in table 18.5, heavy and light
training days may be organized based on the type of exercises that are being
performed regardless of whether the same muscle groups are being used. While
training to failure may length en the necessary recovery time between sessions
(59, 117), athletes may not require longer recovery times despite training with
heavier loads if the volume remains low for the selected exercises (5). Howev er,
strength and condi tioning professionals should be aware that higher volume
loads can lengthen the necessary recovery time between training sessions (124).
There is also evidence that upper body muscles can recover more quickly from
heavy loading sessions compar ed to lower body muscles (76). The same is true
regarding an athlete’ s ability to recover faster from single-joint exercises
compar ed to multijoint exercises (158). These resear ch findings may explain
why, for example, powerl ifters may schedule only one very heavy deadl ift or
squat tr aining session per week.
More importantly , in a recent meta- analysis, Swinton and colleagues (182)
concluded that the most important factor for appropriate adaptations is the
intensi ty used,  with heavy loads (≥80% 1RM) resulting in the greatest increases
in strength and with low to moder ate loads (≤30% 1RM) during ballistic tasks
1215