# Section 18.2

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 18: Program Design for Resistance Training

**Section:** 18.2 -- Step 2: Exercise Selection

**PDF Pages:** 1196--1205

Alternativ ely, increased hypertr ophy may be beneficial for force production, as
well as for collision and contact -based sports (e.g., American footbal l or rugby)
as a protectiv e mechanism against impacts, and to increase the athletes’
momentum (momentum = mass × velocity) to improve outcomes in collisions.
For example, if any reduction in speed is disproportionately lower than the
increase in muscle mass, the collision sport athlete will be able to gener ate
greater momentum, likely making him or her more difficult to stop or tackle. In
contrast, excessiv e hypertr ophy may negativ ely affect the performance of
endur ance-based athletes due to the requirement to carry extra mass for longer
durations (13). Despi te being in the same sport (i.e., athletics) as a shot-put
thrower, a distance athlete requires a substantial amount of cardiovascular and
muscle endur ance within his or her events while also being prone to different
overuse injuries (e.g. , stress fractures).
Moreover, the amount of hypertr ophy may be limited when considering
weight -categoriz ed sports such as weightl ifting, powerl ifting, and combat sports.
Depending on the athlete’ s body composi tion and body mass, there may only be
a limited potential for increases in lean body mass to ensur e he or she does not
exceed the weight category .
Assessment of the Athlete
The second task is to profile  the athlete’ s needs and goals by evaluating
training (and injury) status , conducting a variety of tests (e.g., maximum
strength testing), evaluating the results, and determining the primary goal of
training. The more individual ized the assessment process , the more specific the
resistance tr aining pr ogram for each athlete can be.
Training Status
An athlete’ s current condi tion or level of preparedness to begin a new or revised
program (training status) is an impor tant consider ation in the design of
training programs. This includes an evaluation by a sports medicine professional
of any current or previous injuries that may affect training. Also important is the
athlete’ s training background  or exercise history  (training that occurred
before he or she began a new or revised program), because this information will
help the strength and condi tioning professional better understand the athlete’ s
training capab ilities. Readers are referred to McKay and colleagues (108) for
classification of different levels of athlete performance. An assessment of the
athlete’ s training backgr ound should examine the
type of tr aining pr ogram (sprint, ply ometric, r esistance, and so on),
length of r ecent r egular participation in pr evious tr aining pr ograms,
level of intensi ty involved in pr evious tr aining pr ograms, and
1196
degree of exercise technique experi ence  (i.e., the knowledge and skill
to perf orm r esistance tr aining ex ercises pr operly).
Table 18.1 provides an example of how such information might be used to
classify athlete s’ training status as beginner , intermediate, or advanced. The
strength and condi tioning professional should realize that the three
classifications exist on a continuum and cannot be defini tively demar cated. For
example, in terms of resista nce training, many European soccer athletes will
have undertak en resistance training across their careers, but this is gener ally
emphasiz ed during preseason training with a relatively low frequency and low
training stress, which is further reduced (or completely omitted) in-season,
resulting in few of these athletes ever being classified as advanced in terms of
resistance tr aining status.
TABLE 18.1  Example of Classifying Resistance Training Status
Resistance training
statusResistance training background
Current
programTraining
ageFrequency
(per week)Training
stress*Technique
experience and
skill
Beginner (untr ained) Not tr aining or
just began
training<2
months≤1-2 None or
lowNone or minimal
Intermediate
(moder ately r esistance
trained)Currently
training2-6
months≤2-3 Medium Basic
Advanced (wel l
resistance tr ained)Currently
training≥1 year ≥3-4 High High
*In this example, “training stress” refers to the degree of physical demand or stimulus of the resistance
training pr ogram.
Physical Testing and Evaluation
Physical evaluation involves conducting assessments of the athlete’ s strength,
flexibi lity, powe r, speed, muscular endur ance, body comp osition, cardiovascular
endur ance, and so on. In this chapter , the needs analysis focuses on assessing
maximal muscular strength, but a compr ehensiv e assessment goes beyond that.
While 1RM testing provides valuable information about the maximal load an
athlete can lift during a specific exercise, which aids in programming specific
loads, it is important to evaluate other aspects of an athlete’ s force production
ability. On its own, 1RM testing does not provide insight into an athlete’ s
maximal or rapid force-gener ating capaci ty. As such, isometric strength
assessments, such as the isometric mid-thigh pull, can provide such insight,
1197
especial ly if combined with assessment of slow stretch-shortening cycle (SSC)
function (e.g., countermo vement jump) and fast SSC function (e.g., rebound
jump) using force plates. Readers are referred to chapters 13 and 14 for more
information on athlete testing.
In the soccer athlete exam ple provided in figure 18.3, we see that the
athlete’ s peak force and relative peak force during the isometric mid-thigh pull
are average for the performances across the league in which he or she
competes, highlighting a potential area for development. In contrast, the
athlete’ s count ermovement jump height (45 cm) is very good compar ed to the
rest of the league; howev er, their modified reactiv e strength index (0.46 [mRSI
= jump height / time to takeoff]) is only average, due to a prolonged time to
takeoff (1.0 s) (figure 18.4). This indicates that the athlete gener ated a sufficient
impulse (i.e., force × time) to achiev e the 45-centimeter jump height, using a
greater time for acceleration and therefore a suboptimal force profile. As such,
the athlete needs to emphasiz e strength development; as Cormie and colleagues
(26, 28, 29) previously demonstrated, strength training and the associated
increase in maximal strength  result in enhanced force production characteristics
during jumping , along with reductions in time to takeoff. Finally, the athlete’ s
rebound jump performance highlights a good ground contact time (163 ms) but
a low rebound  jump height (22 cm), resulting in an average reactiv e strength
index (1.40) compar ed to the performances across the league (figure 18.5). The
low jump height may be due to the inability to produce high enough forces
during the short ground contact time to provide a sufficient impulse for a higher
jump height. Overall, these characteristics highlight that the athlete needs to
enhance maximal and rapid force production. As such, initially emphasizing
maximal strength for a training block, followed by a subse quent block of training
emphasizing speed–str ength, ma y be adv antageous.
1198
FIGURE 18.3 Individual isomet ric mid-thigh pull metrics, presented as T-scores for the league in which
the athlete competes. R elative peak f orce (N/kg) is the athlete’ s peak f orce (N) divided b y body mass (kg).
FIGURE 18.4 Individual countermo vement jump performance metrics, presented as T-scores for the
league in which the athlete competes. mRSI = modified reactiv e strength index (mRSI = jump height /
TTT); TTT = time to tak eoff (s).
1199
FIGURE 18.5 Individual countermo vement rebound jump performance metrics, presented as T-scores for
the league  in which the athlete comp etes. RSI = reactiv e strength index (RSI = rebound jump height /
ground contact time).
To yield pertinent and reliable data that can be used effectively to develop a
resistance training program, the tests selected should be related to the athlete’ s
sport, consistent with the athlete’ s level of skill, and realistical ly based on the
equipment available. The result of the movement analysis discussed previously
provides direction in selecting  tests. Typical ly, major upper body exercises (e.g.,
bench press and shoulder press) and exercises that mimic jumping movements
to varying degrees (e.g., power clean, squat, front squat) are used in testing
batteries. Such assessments should not replace the assessment of jump
performance but instead should be used to determine whether any substandar d
jump perf ormances ar e due to poor str ength lev els.
After testing is completed, the results should be compar ed with normativ e or
descriptiv e data (if published data exist or at least to squad data in team sports)
to determine the athlete’ s strengths and weaknesses. Based on this evaluation
and the needs analysis of the sport, a training program can be developed to
improve deficiencies, maintain strengths, or further develop physiological
qualities that wi ll enable the athlete to bet ter meet the demands of the sport.
Primary Resistance Training Goal
The athlete’ s testing results, the movement and physiological analysis of the
sport, and the priorities of the athlete’ s sport season determine the primary goal
or outcome for the resistance  training program. Typical ly, this goal is to improve
1200
strength, powe r, hypertr ophy, or muscular endur ance. Despi te a potential desire
or need to make improvements in two different areas (e.g., strength and
muscular endur ance), an effort should be made to concentr ate on only one
training outco me per training block. This can be accompl ished using an
emphasis/de-emphasis approach wherein specific fitness characteristics are
targeted during different training periods while others are de-emphasiz ed (67).
An exam ple of how the strength and condi tioning professional may prioritize the
resistance training emphases  during the four main sport seasons is shown in
table 18.2. However, while focusing on the development of a specific physical
characteristic, it is important to provide sufficient stimul i for the maintenance of
other physical characteristics, especial ly if they are to be emphasiz ed in
subsequent blocks of training. A common strategy in many team sports is to
alternate between strength (i.e., strength–speed) and power (i.e., speed–
strength) development in-season, because the higher volumes associated with
strength endurance– and hypertr ophy-focused training can induce excessiv e
fatigue and potential ly result in an increased injury risk. Howev er, while this may
be easier to accompl ish with individual sports or events (e.g., track and field), a
team-based sport (e.g., basketball, soccer, hockey) that requires several fitness
characteristics for success may have to use a multitargeted approach within
training to develop those multiple characteristics simultaneously (177). Within
this approach, it has been suggested that compatible fitness characteristics (e.g.,
strength–power and speed) be trained simultaneously while avoiding
incompatible characteristics (e.g., speed and cardiovascular endur ance). An
emphasis/de-emphasis approach can still be used in these situations (see
chapter 22  for mor e information).
TABLE 18.2  Example of General Training Priorities by Sport
Season
Sport seasonPriority given to
Resistance training goal*Sport
practiceResistance
training
Off-season Low High Hypertr ophy and muscular endur ance (ini tially); str ength
and power (later)
Preseason Medium Medium Sport and mo vement speci fic (i.e. , strength, power , or
muscular endur ance, depending on the sport)
In-season High Low Maintenance of pr eseason tr aining goal; i f in-season is
long, these goals ma y alternate between di fferent
characteristics (e.g. , strength and power)
*The actual training goals and priorities are based on the specific sport or activity and may differ from the
goals l isted her e.
1201
Postseason
(activ e rest)Variable Variable Not speci fic (ma y include activi ties other than sport ski ll or
resistance tr aining)
*The actual training goals and priorities are based on the specific sport or activity and may differ from the
goals l isted her e.
1202
Step 2: Exercise Selection
Exercise selection  involves choosing exercises for a resistance training
program. To make informed exercise selections, the strength and condi tioning
professional must understand the nature of various types of resistance training
exercises, the movement and muscular requirements of the sport, the athlete’ s
exercise techn ique experien ce, the equipment available, and the amount of
training time available. Figure 18.2 on page 528 displays exercise selection flow
charts f or lower body str ength and power ex ercises.
Exercise Type
Although there are hundr eds of resistance training exercises to select from when
one is designin g a program, most involve primary muscle groups or body areas
and fall into categories based on their r elative importance to the athlete’ s sport.
Core and Assistance Exercises
Exercises can be classified as either core or assistance based on the size of the
muscle areas involved and their level of contribution to a particular sport
movement. Core exercises  recruit one or more large muscle areas (i.e., chest,
shoulder , back, hip, or thigh), involve two or more primary joints (multijoint
exercises ; e.g., split squat, bench press, bent-over row), and receive priority
when one is selecting exercises because of their direct application to the sport
and enhanced dynamic correspondence (i.e., transference of gym-based training
to improved performance in athletic tasks). Assistance exercises  usually
recruit smaller muscle areas (i.e., upper arm, abdominal muscles, calf, neck,
forearm, lower back, or anterior lower leg), involve only one primary joint
(single-joint exercises ; e.g., knee extension and flexion, biceps curls), and
are considered less important  for improving sport performance. Gener ally, all the
joints at the shoulder —the glenohumer al and shoulder girdle articulations— are
consider ed one primary  joint when resistance training exercises are categoriz ed
as core or assistance. The spine is similarly consider ed a single primary joint
(e.g., abdominal crunch and back extension ex ercises).
Application of the Needs Analysis
Refer to the first scenario table on page 528  for a description of the scenario athletes.
Scenario A Scenario BScenario C
The information in this table reflects one approach to evaluating the requirements of a sport and profiling
an athlete.
1203
Female collegiate basketball
player
In-seasonMale professional American
football lineman
Off-seasonMale high school cross country
runner
Preseason
SPORT EVALUATION
Movement analysis
Sport:  Running and jumping, bal l
handl ing, shooting, blocking, and
rebounding
Muscular in volvement:  All major
muscle ar eas, especial ly the hips,
thighs, and shoulders
Physiological analysis (primary
requirement)
Strength/powerSPORT EVALUATION
Movement analysis
Sport:  Grabbing, pushing,
repelling, and deflecting
opponents
Muscular in volvement:  All
major muscle ar eas, especial ly
the hips, thighs, chest, arms,
and low back
Physiological analysis
(primary requirement)
Hypertr ophySPORT EVALUATION
Movement analysis
Sport:  Running, r epetitive leg and
arm mo vements
Muscular in volvement:  All lower
body muscle ar eas, postur al
muscles, shoulders, and arms
Physiological analysis (primary
requirement)
Muscular endur ance
ATHLETE’S PROFILE
Training background
Has resistance tr ained r egularly
since high school
Possesses ex cellent ski ll in
performing f ree weight and
machine ex ercises
Just completed a 3 ×/week
resistance tr aining pr ogram in
the pr eseason consisting of f ull-
body work outs that included
lower and upper body ex ercises
during each session (4 cor e, 3
sets of 3 r eps using loads
ranging f rom 4RM-6RM)ATHLETE’S PROFILE
Training background
Has resistance tr ained
regularly thr oughout high
school, col lege, and his
professional car eer
Possesses ex cellent ski ll in
performing f ree weight and
machine ex ercises
Just completed a 2 ×/week
resistance tr aining pr ogram
in the postseasonb consisting
of 8 ex ercises (3 cor e, 5
assistance; 4 lower body , 4
upper body , 2-3 sets of
12RM-15RM loads)ATHLETE’S PROFILE
Training background
Just began r esistance tr aining in
preseason
Has only l imited ski ll in
performing f ree weight and
machine ex ercises
Just completed a 3 ×/week
resistance tr aining pr ogram in
the of f-seasonc consisting of f ull-
body work outs that included
lower and upper body ex ercises
during each session (2-3 sets of
6-8 reps using loads r anging
from 8RM-10RM)
CLASSIFICATION OF
RESISTANCE TRAINING
STATUS
AdvancedCLASSIFICATION OF
RESISTANCE TRAINING
STATUS
AdvancedCLASSIFICATION OF
RESISTANCE TRAINING
STATUS
Beginner
PRIMARY IN-SEASON
RESISTANCE TRAINING GOAL
Strength/poweraPRIMARY OFF-SEASON
RESISTANCE TRAINING
GOAL
Hypertr ophyPRIMARY PRESEASON
RESISTANCE TRAINING GOAL
Muscular endur ance
The information in this table reflects one approach to evaluating the requirements of a sport and profiling
an athlete.
1204
COMMENTS
aThe in-season wi ll addr ess both of
these goals thr ough a combination
of appr opriate ex ercise selection
and v olume–load assignments.COMMENTS
bDue to the extr eme ph ysical
demands of American f ootbal l,
this athlete’ s postseason
training v olume w as greater
than is often assigned f or the
active rest phase of a t ypical
program.COMMENTS
cBecause this athlete just began
his resistance tr aining pr ogram, his
frequency w as limited to 3 ×/week
in the of f-season r ather than the
4×/week that ar e typical ly
completed b y better-trained
individuals.
The information in this table reflects one approach to evaluating the requirements of a sport and profiling
an athlete.
A common application of assistance exercises is for injury prevention and
rehabi litation, because these exercises often isolate a specific muscle or muscle
group. The muscles that are predisposed to injury from the unique demands of a
sport skill (e.g., the shoulder external rotators for overhand pitching) or those
that require recondi tioning after an injury (e.g., a quadric eps contusion) can be
specifically conditioned by an assistance exercise. Howev er, it is important that
the chosen exercises improve a physical characteristic within the program
(flexibi lity, strength, etc.) and that the professional prescribes them appropriately
with speci fic volumes and intensi ties.
Structural and Power Exercises
A core exercise that emphas izes loading the spine directly (e.g., back squat) or
indirectly (e.g., power clean) can be further described as a structural
exercise . More specifically, a structur al exercise involves muscular stabilization
of postu re during performanc e of the lifting movement (e.g., maintaining a rigid
torso and a neutral spine during the back squat). Practitioners should be mindf ul
that during traditional structur al exercises (e.g., squat and bench press), a
substantial portion of the range of motion results in deceleration (47, 93, 119).
As such, ballistic tasks that emphasiz e movement velocity (e.g., loaded jumps)
should be programmed to emphasiz e power development. A structur al exercise
that is performed very quickly or explosiv ely is consider ed a power exercise .
Typical ly, power exercises are assigned to athletes when they are appropriate for
the athlete’ s sport-speci fic training priorities. It should be noted, howev er, that in
weak athletes , or those with a low training age, emphasizing strength
development has been shown to enhance power output to an equal or greater
extent than ballistic training (26, 28, 29). Semi-bal listic exercises, such as
weightl ifting exercises and their derivatives, can also be used effectively for the
development of power because they provide the potential to emphasiz e a
velocity- or force-dominant stimulus (figure 18.6) (21, 170-173). Such a diverse
range of exercises also permi ts substantial variation and the opportuni ty to
1205