# Section 18.4

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 18: Program Design for Resistance Training

**Section:** 18.4 -- Step 4: Exercise Order

**PDF Pages:** 1216--1225

stimulating the greatest increases in vertical jump performance and moder ate
loads (40%-70% 1RM) being the most appropriate for power development.
Howev er, as mentioned previously , an emphasis on strength development in
weaker individuals may result in the greatest improvements in performance (8,
26, 29, 30, 178). This is likely due to the fact that relative force production
determines acceleration, with the duration over which  the force is applied
determining ac celeration, based on the impulse–momentum theor em.
Other Training
Exercise frequency is also influenced by the overall amount of physical stress, so
the strength and condi tioning  professional must consider the effects of all forms
of exercise. If the athlete’ s program already includes aerobic endur ance (e.g.,
long, slow distance) or speed, agility, and power (e.g., sprinting, agility, speed –
endur ance, plyometric) training, sport skill practice, or any combination of these
components, the frequency of resistance training may need to be reduced (32).
Additional ly, the effects of a physical ly demanding occupation may be relevant.
Athletes who work in manual labor jobs, instruct or assist others in physical
activities, or are on their feet all day may not be able to withstand the same
training frequency as athletes who are less active outside  of their sport-related
pursui ts.
1216
Step 4: Exercise Order
Exercise order  refers to a sequence of resistance exercises performed during
one training session. Although there are many ways to arrange exercises,
decisions are invariably based  on how one exercise affects the quality of effort or
the technique of another exercise. Usual ly, exercises are arranged so that an
athlete’ s maximal force capabilities are available (from a sufficient rest or
recovery period) to complete a set with proper exercise technique. Four of the
most common methods of ordering resistance exercises are described in the
following par agraphs.
Application of the Training Frequency Guidelines
Refer to the first scenario table on page 528  for a description of the scenario athletes.
Scenario A
Female collegiate basketball
player
In-seasonScenario B
Male professional American
football lineman
Off-seasonScenario C
Male high school cross
country runner
Preseason
ADVANCED TRAINING STATUS
ALLOWS
4-7×/weekADVANCED TRAINING STATUS
ALLOWS
4-7×/weekBEGINNER TRAINING
STATUS ALLOWS
2-3×/week
FREQUENCY GUIDELINE
BASED ON THE SPORT SEASON
1-3×/weekFREQUENCY GUIDELINE
BASED ON THE SPORT
SEASON
4-6×/weekFREQUENCY GUIDELINE
BASED ON THE SPORT
SEASON
3-4×/week
ASSIGNED RESISTANCE
TRAINING FREQUENCY
3×/weeka
Total body work outs perf ormed on
Monda y, Wednesda y, and Frida y
while incorpor ating a push, pul l,
and mix emphasisASSIGNED RESISTANCE
TRAINING FREQUENCY
4×/week (spl it routineb)
Monda y and Thursda y (lower body
exercises)
Tuesda y and Frida y (upper body
exercises)ASSIGNED RESISTANCE
TRAINING FREQUENCY
2×/weekc
Total body work outs perf ormed
on Wednesda y and Satur day
while incorpor ating a hea vy and
light emphasis
COMMENTS
aTraining f requency is maintained
from the pr evious season
(preseason) to al low for the
maintenance and impr ovement of
strength–power char acteristics
during the in-season phase of
training.COMMENTS
bA split routine al lows f or mor e
overall exercises to be perf ormed
without an ex cessiv e incr ease in
training time (per session)
because the ex ercises ar e divided
over mor e training da ys.COMMENTS
cDespi te the sport season, the
assigned tr aining f requency is
based on the athlete’ s training
status and the addi tional need
to dev elop car diovascular
endur ance.
1217
Power, Other Core, Then Assistance Exercises
Power exercises such as weightlifting movements and their derivatives (e.g.,
snatch, hang power clean, jump shrug) and other ballistic exercises (e.g., jump
squat or hexagonal barbel l jump) should be performed first in a training session,
followed by other non-power  core exercises, and then assistance exercises. This
is due to the large neuromuscular demand placed on the body by power
exercises because they require greater levels of skill and are prone to fatigue
(71). The literature also refers to this arrangement as multijoint exercises and
then single-join t exercises or large muscle areas and then small muscle areas
(151, 183). Athletes who become fatigued are prone to using poor technique
and consequently are at higher risk of injury . The explosiv e movements and
extensiv e muscular involvement of power exercises also result in substantial
energy expend iture (138). This is another reason to have athletes perform such
exercises first, while they are still metabol ically fresh. If power exercises are not
selected in step 2 (exercise selection), the recommended  order of exercises is
core exercises (ideal ly with the most demanding exercises first) and then
assistance exercises. This is an important consider ation because resear chers
have shown that greater maximal strength adaptations may be produced with
the exercises programmed earlier in a training session (44, 152) while the latter
exercises may be negativ ely affected due to the accumulated fatigue (116, 150,
152).
Lower and Upper Body Exercises (Alternated)
One method of providing the opportuni ty for athletes to recover more fully
between exercises is to alternate lower body exercises with upper body
exercises. This arrangement is especial ly helpful for untrained individuals who
find that comp leting several lower or upper body exercises in succession is too
strenuous (50). Also, if training time is limited, this method of arranging
exercises minimiz es the length of the rest periods required between exercises
and maximizes the rest between body areas. The result is a decrease in overall
training time because the athlete can perform a lower body exercise and then
immediately go to an upper body exercise without having to wait for the lower
body to rest. Howev er, when choosing an order between lower and upper body
exercises, strength and condi tioning professionals should consider prescribing
lower body exercises first since these movements typical ly involve more muscle
mass and may place a greater overall stress on the body due to the absolute
loads that will be used. If the exercises are performed with minimal rest periods
(20-30 s), this method is also referred to as circuit training  (gener ally not
optimal for the development of maximal strength)— a method sometimes also
1218
used to improve cardiovascular endur ance (58, 130), although to a lesser extent
than con ventional aer obic ex ercise tr aining.
“Push” and “Pull” Exercises (Alternated)
Another metho d of improving efficiency of training when time is limited is to
alternate pushing exercises (e.g., bench press, shoulder press, triceps extension)
with pulling exercises (e.g., lat pulldown, bent-over row, biceps curl) (2). This
push–pul l arrangement ensur es that the same muscle group will not be used in
two exercises (or sets, in some cases) in succession, thus reducing fatigue in the
involved muscl es. This approach is similar to the programming of antagonistic
supersets, described later. In contrast, arranging several pulling exercises (e.g.,
pull-up, seated row, hammer curl) one after the other, even with a rest period
between each, will compr omise the number of repetitions performed because
the biceps brachii muscle (involved in all three exercises) will become less
responsiv e due to fatigue. The same result would occur if several pushing
exercises (e.g., incline bench press, shoulder press, triceps pushdown) were
sequential ly arranged (all three engage the triceps brachii) (150). There are also
push–pul l arrangements for the lower body—for example, back squat and front
squat as “push ” and stiff-legged deadl ift and leg (knee) curl as “pull”—but the
classification of some exercises as “push” or “pull” is not as clear (e.g., leg
[knee] extension). Howev er, in such examples strength and condi tioning
professionals need to be mindf ul when selecting such exercises to ensur e that
key stabilizing muscles (e.g., erector spinae) are not excessiv ely fatigued in both
exercises. Alternating push and pull exercises is also used in circuit training
programs and is an ideal arrangement for novice athletes or those returning to a
resistance tr aining pr ogram (3).
Supersets and Compound Sets
Other methods  of arranging exercises involve having athletes perform one set of
a pair of exercises with little to no rest between them. Two common examples
are supersets and compound sets. A superset  involves two sequential ly
performed exercises that stress two opposing muscles or muscle areas (i.e., an
agonist and its antagonist) (2), similar to the push–pul l approach. For example,
an athlete performs 10 repetitions of the barbel l biceps curl exercise, sets the
barbel l down, then goes over to the triceps pushdown station and performs 10
repetitions. A compound set involves sequential ly performing two different
exercises for the same muscle group (2). For instance, an athlete completes a
set of the barbell biceps curl exercise, then switches to dumbbel ls and
immediately performs a set of the hammer curl exercise. In this case, the stress
on the same muscle is compounded because both exercises recruit the same
1219
muscle area. Both methods of arranging and performing pairs of exercises are
time efficient and purposely  more demanding— and consequently may not be
appropriate for uncondi tioned athletes. Note, howev er, that sometimes the
meanings of superset  and compound set  are inter changed.
Application of the Exercise Order Guidelines
Refer to the first scenario table on page 528  for a description of the scenario athletes.
Scenario A
Female collegiate
basketball player
In-seasonScenario B
Male professional American
football lineman
Off-seasonScenario C
Male high school cross country runner
Preseason
ASSIGNED EXERCISE
ORDER STRATEGIES
Power, other cor e, then
assistance ex ercises
“Push” and “pul l” exercises
(alternated)ASSIGNED EXERCISE
ORDER STRATEGIES
Core and then assistance
exercises
“Push” and “pul l” exercises
(alternated)ASSIGNED EXERCISE ORDER
STRATEGIES
Core and then assistance ex ercises
Lower and upper body ex ercises
(alternated)
MONDAY
Push jerk
Front squata
Incline bench pr essb
Triceps pushdown
WEDNESDAY
Hang power clean
Romanian deadl ifta
Seated r owb
Dumbbel l alternating curl
FRIDAY
Jump shrug
Rear leg–elev ated spl it-
squata
Pull-upb
Single-leg sti ff-legged
deadl iftLOWER BODY (MONDAY
AND THURSDAY)
Deadl iftc
Back squatc
Step-upc
Leg (knee) curl
Seated cal f (heel) r aise
UPPER BODY (TUESDAY
AND FRIDAY)
Bench pr ess
Bent-over row
Shoulder pr ess
Barbell biceps curld
Shoulder shrug
Lying triceps extension
Abdominal crunchWEDNESDAY
Hexagonal barbel l deadl ift
Vertical chest pr ess
One-arm dumbbel l row
Abdominal crunch
Machine back extensione
SATURDAY
Lunge
Lateral shoulder r aise
Single-leg sti ff-legged deadl ift
Toe raise (dorsi flexion)
Abdominal crunch
Machine back extensione
COMMENTS
a,bThese ex ercises ar e
alternated to pr ovide r elative
rest between their simi lar
movement pat terns whi le still
following the “power , other
core, then assistance”
exercise or der str ategy .COMMENTS
cThese ex ercises do not f ollow
the “push” and “pul l”
(alternated) ex ercise
arrangement and could be
performed in a v ariety of
sequences (e.g. , back squat,
deadl ift, step-up).COMMENTS
eExercises that concentrical ly train the
lower back muscles should be perf ormed
after ex ercises that r equire an er ect torso
or a neutr al spine posi tion (e.g. , lunge
and later al shoulder r aise). F atigue of the
lower back muscles can r esult in incorr ect
and potential ly injurious ex ercise
1220
dAlthough the barbel l biceps
curl ex ercise is a “pul ling”
movement and oc curs bef ore
another “pul l” exercise
(shoulder shrug), i t does not
affect the athlete’ s ability to
perform the shoulder shrug
exercise.technique in structur al or standing
exercises.
1221
Step 5: Training Load and Repetitions
Load  most simply refers to the amount of weight assigned to an exercise set
and is often characteriz ed as the most critical aspect of a resistance training
program (50, 106, 162, 163).
Terminology Used to Quantify and Qualify
Mechanical Work
Mechanical work  can be defined as the product of force and displacement
(sometimes referred to as distance ). An athlete  can perform (external)
mechanical work via demands made on the body to gener ate (internal)
metabol ic energy. Thus, it is important to quanti fy the amount of mechanical
work or degree of metabol ic demand to plan variation in the training program
and to avoid the exhaustion phase of Selye’s Gener al Adaptation Syndrome
associated wi th overtraining (33, 148).
A quanti ty measur e for resistance training work is needed. Traditional ly, at
least in the sport of weight lifting, this work is called the load, and one can
calculate it by multiplying each weight lifted by the number of times it is lifted
and summing all such values over a training session. Volume–load  is a proxy
for work, because displacem ent and force production are not measur ed in
applied settings. Howev er, volume–load  (90) is a better term than just load. This
quanti ty is related to mech anical work and the associated metabol ic energy
demands and physiological stress and is distinguished from repetition-volume
(i.e., the total number of r epetitions; see Step 6: V olume f or mor e explanation).
Volume–load should be consider ed as system mass volume–load  in the
calculation of resistance training in which the athlete or a mass is moved (e.g.,
loaded jump squats). For example, an 80-kilogram athlete with a 40-kilogram
jump squat load for 4 sets of 3 is doing 120 kilograms × 12, or 1,440 kilograms.
In contrast, when the athlet e’s mass is not being lifted (e.g., bench press or
shoulder press), only the external load should be included in the volume–load
calculation. Volume–load approaches are also useful in quantifying the nature of
the total resistance training load, by separ ating the volume–load from core and
assistance exercises or delineating between hypertr ophy, maximal strength, and
power training. In this way, the strength and condi tioning professional can plan
or determine not just the total volume–load for the session but also what
stimulus is achiev ed primari ly from the session.
The typical calculation of volume–load (i.e., sets × repetitions × load) does
not account for the distance that external load is traveling. Given that athletes
possess unique  anthropometr ic characteristics (e.g., heigh t and arm length), the
1222
amount of work being performed by athletes within a training session may vary.
For example, athletes who are 5 feet 6 inches (1.68 m) and 6 feet (1.83 m) in
statur e who perform the back squat exercise with the same load and to the
same squat depth are performing different magni tudes of work based on the
displacement of the barbel l. Within this scenario , the taller athlete must move
(displace) the external load a greater distance, which results in performing more
work than the shorter athlete. When monitoring training load, load displacement
can be accounted for by calculating volume–load displacement , which
multiplies volume–load by the displacement of the exercise. Although strongly
correlated to volume–load, resear chers have indicat ed that volume–load
displacement may provide a better indicator of an athlete’ s overall workload
totals (78). Thus, if strength and condi tioning professionals have the time to
measur e the displacements of exercises for their athlet es (using appropriate
technology), greater insight into how athletes respond to various training phases
may be pr ovided.
Note that the volume–load is not affected by the set and repetition scheme
(e.g., 15 sets of 1 repetition, 5 sets of 3 repetitions, 3 sets of 5 repetitions, or 1
set of 15 repetitions). Various set and repetition schemes affect the true
intensity  value for resistance exercise and indicate the quality of work
performed. Instead of using time to calculate mechanical or metabol ic power or
intensi ty, it is more practical to use a value that is proportional to time—namely ,
rep-volume. The more repetitions performed, the longer the training session;
rest period lengths are an additional consider ation and are not directly
accounted for. Dividing volume–load by rep-volume results in the average weight
lifted per r epetition per work out session (162).
Relationship Between Load and Repetitions
The number of times an exercise can be performed (repetitions ) is inversely
related to the load lifted; the heavier the load, the lower the number of
repetitions that can be performed. Therefore, focusing on one training goal
automatical ly implies the use of a certain load and repetition regimen (e.g.,
training for maximal muscul ar strength involves lifting very heavy loads [i.e.,
≥80% 1RM] f or few repetitions [i.e. , ≤6 repetitions]).
Before assigning training loads, the strength and condi tioning professional
should unders tand this relationship between loads and repetitions. Load is
commonly described as either a certain percentage of a 1-repetition
maximum (1RM)—the greatest  amount of weight that can be lifted with
proper techniq ue for only 1 repetition—or the most weight lifted for a specified
number of repetitions, an xRM. For instance , if athletes can perform 10
repetitions with 60 kilograms in the back squat exercise, the 10RM is 60
1223
kilograms. It is assumed that the athlete provided a maximal effort; if he or she
had stopped at 9 repetitions but could have performed 1 more, a 10RM would
not have been achiev ed. Likewise, if he or she lifted 55 kilograms for 10
repetitions but could have performed more, the true 10RM was not accurately
assessed because the athlete possibly could have lifted 60 kilograms for 10
repetitions.
Table 18.8 shows the relationship between a submaximal load—calc ulated as
a percentage of the 1RM— and the number of repetitions that can be performed
at that load. By defini tion, 100% of the 1RM allows the athlete to perform 1
repetition. As the percentage of the 1RM (i.e., the load lifted) decreases, the
athlete will be able to successfully complete more repetitions. Howev er, strength
and condi tioning professionals should be cautious because the number of
repetitions that can be performed at a given load may be specific to the exercise
as wel l as the individual (120, 134).
TABLE 18.8  Percent of the 1RM and Repetitions Allowed
(%1RM–Repetition Relationship)
%1RM Number of reps allowed
100 1
95 2
93 3
90 4
87 5
85 6
83 7
80 8
77 9
75 10
70 11
67 12
65 15
Note:  The number of reps performed at each percentage may be based on individual characteristics as
well as the ex ercise being perf ormed (120, 134).
Data f rom Hoeger et al. (1987); Hoeger et al. (1990); Ma yhew et al. (1992).
1224
Although %1RM–r epetition tables provide helpful guidel ines for assigning an
athlete’ s training loads, resear ch to date does not support  the widespr ead use of
such tables for establ ishing training loads for every exercise assigned to athletes,
for the f ollowing r easons:
Table 18.8 assum es there is a linear association between the loads lifted
and the repetitions performed; howev er, several studies have reported a
curvilinear r elationship (95, 99, 103).
Resistance-tr ained athletes may be able to exceed the number of
repetitions listed in the table at any given percentage of their 1RM,
especial ly in lower body cor e exercises (74 , 75, 120, 134).
The number of repetitions that can be performed at a certain percentage
of the 1RM is based on a single set. When an athlete performs multiple
sets, the loads may need to be reduced so that the desired number of
repetitions can be completed in all the sets. Despi te the prevalence of 1RM
resear ch, athletes may not always perform the predicted number of
repetitions at a specified percentage of a 1RM. For instance, resear chers
have shown that subjects were able to perform two or three times  more
repetitions than ar e listed in table 18.8  (74, 75, 134).
A certain percentage of the 1RM assigned to a machine exercise can result
in more repetitions at the same percentage of the 1RM than with a similar
free weight ex ercise (74 , 75).
Exercises involving smaller muscle areas may not produce as many
repetitions as seen in table 18.8, and exercises recruiting large muscle
areas ar e likely to r esult in mor e repetitions perf ormed (183).
Empirical evidence further suggests that as the percentage of the 1RM
decreases, the variabi lity in the number of repetitions that can be
completed increases. For example, the most accurate relationship between
percentages of the 1RM and the maximum repetitions possible is for loads
greater than 75% of the 1RM and fewer than 10 repetitions (133) with
greater ac curacy coming wi th even lower r epetitions (45).
Therefore, loads calculated from the %1RM in table 18.8 should be used only
as a guidel ine for estimatin g a particular RM load for a resistance training
exercise. Even with the inherent weaknesses just explaine d, it appears that it is
still more accurate to assign loads based on a percentag e of a test-establ ished
1RM than i t is to estimate a 1RM f rom a submaximal load (74 , 75).
1RM and xRM Testing Options
To gather information needed to assign a training load, the strength and
condi tioning pr ofessional has the option of determining the athlete’ s
1225