# Section 18.7

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 18: Program Design for Resistance Training

**Section:** 18.7 -- Step 7: Rest Periods

**PDF Pages:** 1251--1259

when volume is matched (140). Furthermor e, it has been reported that there are
no differences in hypertr ophic adaptations following low (<60% 1RM) or high
(>60% 1RM) load training programs (141). Thus, it is important that strength
and conditioning professionals understand that heavy loads (i.e., >80% 1RM)
can be used to train muscle hypertr ophy rather than only maximal strength
characteristics. In fact, the use of heavier loads may target specific fibers and
higher threshold motor units (i.e., type II) to a greater extent than lighter loads
(82, 106, 158), which in turn may allow for greater force, rapid force, and power
output adaptat ions in future training blocks (187). Thus, it has been suggested
that using heavier loads to target hypertr ophic adaptations may be more
beneficial to strength and power athletes (53, 97). Howev er, it is also important
to adjust the number of sets and repetitions compar ed to traditional hypertr ophy
prescription; for example, strength and condi tioning  professionals could
prescribe 10 sets of 3 repetitions when using heavier loads compar ed to the
more traditional 3 sets of 10 repetitions typical ly prescribed when targeting
hypertr ophy. Moreover, caution should be taken when prescribing training in this
manner becaus e the volume–loads can be quite high and the time it may take to
complete a given exercise with proper rest periods between sets may lead to
length y training  sessions. Therefore, it is suggested that users do not implement
this set and r epetitions scheme wi th every ex ercise.
Muscular Endurance
Resistance training programs that emphasiz e muscular endur ance involve
performing many repetitions—12 or more—per set (160, 161). Despi te this
relatively high repetition assignment, the overall volume–load is not necessari ly
overly inflated since the loads lifted are lighter and fewer sets are performed,
commonly 2 or 3 per ex ercise.
Application of the Volum e Guidelines
Refer to the first scenario table on page 528  for a description of the scenario athletes.
Scenario A
Female collegiate basketball player
In-seasonScenario B
Male professional American
football lineman
Off-seasonScenario C
Male high school cross
country runner
Preseason
Power ex ercises  3 sets of 3 r eps
Other cor e  3 sets of 4 r eps ex ercises
Assistance  2 sets of 8 r eps ex ercises
(The number of sets does not include
warm-ups. )Core exercises  3 sets of 10
  r eps
Assistance  3 sets of 10
exercises  r eps
(The number of sets does not
include w arm-ups. )Core exercises  3 sets of 12
  r eps
Assistance  2 sets of 15
exercises   r eps
(The number of sets does not
include w arm-ups. )
1251
MONDAY
Push jerk  3  × 3a
Front squat  3  × 4
Incline bench pr ess  3  × 4
Triceps pushdown  3  × 8
WEDNESDAY
Hang power clean  3  × 3
Romanian deadl ift  3  × 4
Seated r ow  3  × 4
Dumbbel l  3  × 8 alternating curl
FRIDAY
Jump shrug  3  × 3
Rear leg–elev ated  3  × 4 split-squat
Pull-up  3  × 4
Single-leg sti ff-  3  × 4 legged
deadl iftLOWER BODY (MONDAY
AND THURSDAY)
Deadl ift  3  × 10
Back squat  3  × 10
Step-up  3  × 10
Leg (knee) curl  3  × 10
Seated cal f (heel)   3  × 10
raise
UPPER BODY (TUESDAY
AND FRIDAY)
Bench pr ess  3  × 10
Bent-over row  3  × 10
Shoulder pr ess  3  × 10
Barbell biceps curl  3  × 10
Shoulder shrug  3  × 10
Lying triceps  3  × 10
extension
Abdominal crunch  3  × 20WEDNESDAY
Hexagonal barbel l  3  × 12
deadl ift
Vertical chest pr ess  3  × 12
One-arm dumbbel l  3  × 12
row
Abdominal crunch  2  × 20
Machine back  2  × 15
extension
SATURDAY
Lunge  3  × 12
Lateral shoulder  3  × 12
raise
Single-leg sti ff-  3  × 12
legged deadl ift
Toe raise  3  × 12
(dorsi flexion)
Abdominal crunch  2  × 20
Machine back  2  × 15
extension
COMMENTS
aRepresented as sets  × repetitions her e
and in scenarios A, B , and C.
1252
Step 7: Rest Periods
The time dedicated to recovery between sets and exercises is called the rest
period  or inter-set rest. The length of the rest period between sets and
exercises is highly dependent  on the goal of training, the relative load lifted, and
the athlete’ s training status. (If the athlete is not in good physical condi tion, rest
periods ini tially ma y need to be longer than t ypical ly assigned. )
The amount of rest between sets is strongly related to load; the heavier the
loads lifted, the longer the rest periods the athlete will need between sets to
safely and successfully compl ete the prescribed subsequent sets and to promote
higher quality training. For example, training for muscu lar strength with 4RM
loads would likely require significantly longer rest periods between sets than
training for muscular endur ance in which lighter 15RM loads are lifted. Despi te
the relationship between training goals and the length of rest periods (e.g., long
rest periods for muscular strength training programs), not all exercises in a
resistance training program should be assigned the same rest periods. It is
important that the strength and condi tioning professiona l allocate rest periods
based on the relative load lifted and the amount of muscle mass involved in
each exercise. An example of this specificity is for an assistance exercise as part
of a muscular strength training program. Whereas a core exercise such as the
bench press may involve a 4RM load and a 4-minute rest period, an assistance
exercise such as the lateral shoulder raise may be performed with a 12RM load
and therefore require only a 1-minute rest period (even though 1-min rest
periods gener ally apply to a hypertr ophy training program). The recommended
rest period lengths for strength, power , hypertr ophy, and muscular endur ance
programs ar e shown in table 18.15 .
TABLE 18.15  Rest Period Length Assignments Based on the
Training Goal
Training goal* Rest period length
Strength 2-5 min
Power (single- and mul tiple-ef fort ev ent) 2-5 min
*Because there are occasions when the prescribed percentage of the 1RM for assistance exercises falls
outside the range associated with the training goal (e.g., ≥8RM loads are recommended for assistance
exercises as part of a muscular strength training program [2]), the strength and condi tioning professional
should examine the loads used for each exercise when assigning rest periods rather than gener ally
applying the guidel ines f or a tr aining goal.
Data from Fleck and Kraemer (2014); Gettman and Pollock (1981); Robinson et al. (1995); Scala et al.
(1987); S choenf eld et al. (2016); Stone and O’B ryant (1987); Stone et al. (2022); T esch et al. (1986).
1253
Hypertr ophy 2-3 min f or mul tijoint ex ercises; 60-90 s f or single-joint
exercises
Muscular endur ance ≤30 s
*Because there are occasions when the prescribed percentage of the 1RM for assistance exercises falls
outside the range associated with the training goal (e.g., ≥8RM loads are recommended for assistance
exercises as part of a muscular strength training program [2]), the strength and condi tioning professional
should examine the loads used for each exercise when assigning rest periods rather than gener ally
applying the guidel ines f or a tr aining goal.
Data from Fleck and Kraemer (2014); Gettman and Pollock (1981); Robinson et al. (1995); Scala et al.
(1987); S choenf eld et al. (2016); Stone and O’B ryant (1987); Stone et al. (2022); T esch et al. (1986).
Strength and Power
Training may enhance an athlete’ s ability to exercise with less rest, but athletes
who seek to perform maximal or near-maximal repetitions with a heavy load
usually need long rest period s, especial ly for lower body or all-body structur al
exercises (149, 193). For example, Robinson and colleagues (136) observ ed
that, in the back squat exercise, 3 minutes of inter-set rest resulted in greater
strength gains than a 30-sec ond rest period. Common guidel ines for rest period
length range 2 to 5 minutes (50, 162, 163) because these rest periods have
been shown to permi t greater volumes of work (194), allow for the use of
heavier loads (193), and result in greater maximal strength and power
adaptations (38, 136) compar ed to shorter r est interv als.
Hypertrophy
Athletes who are interested in gaining muscular size often use a short to
moder ate inter-set rest period (50). In fact, earlier reviews of hypertr ophy
training programs supported the use of shorter rest periods because it was
recommended that the athlet e begin the next set before full recovery has been
achiev ed (72, 184). Despi te this, the high metabol ic demand of exercises
involving large muscle groups merits consider ation (i.e., extra recovery time)
when rest period lengths are being assigned (138, 185). While rest periods for
hypertr ophy are typical ly 1.5 minutes or less, longer rest periods (i.e., 3 min)
have been shown to produced greater increases in muscle hypertr ophy
compar ed to those that were shorter (i.e., 1 min) (145). Longer rest periods may
allow athletes to train with a higher overall volume–load that may coincide with
the use of heavier training loads (62), which may in turn increase time under
tension and the stimulus for hypertr ophy. Thus, rest periods for training muscle
hypertr ophy may exist on a spectrum depending on the loads used and the
targeted mechanism of hypertr ophy (i.e., tension, metabol ic alterations, or
damage).
1254
Muscular Endurance
A muscular endur ance training program has very short rest periods, often less
than 30 seconds. This restriction of the recovery time is purposef ul; only a
minimal amount of rest is allowed when light loads are being lifted for many
repetitions. This type of program is designed to meet the guidel ine of the
specificity principle for muscular endur ance (2). Short rest periods are
characteristic of circuit training programs (58) in which it is common to alternate
exercises and l imit rest period lengths to 30 seconds or less.
1255
Conclusion
Well-designed programs are based on the application of sound principles during
each step of a process referred to as program design . The process begins with a
needs analysis to determine the specific demands of the sport and the training
status of the athlete. With this knowledge, appropriate exercises are selected,
and training frequency is establ ished. The order of exercises in the workout is
consider ed next, followed by load assignments and training volume choices
based on desired training outcomes. Deciding on the length of the rest periods is
the last step leading to the design of a sport-speci fic resistance training
program. A composi te view that includes all the program design variables (steps
1-7) f or the thr ee scenarios is shown in the scenario table.
Application of the Rest Period Guidelines
Refer to the first scenario table on page 528  for a description of the scenario athletes.
Scenario A
Female collegiate basketball player
In-seasonScenario B
Male professional American
football lineman
Off-seasonScenario C
Male high school cross
country runner
Preseason
Power and cor e  3 min ex ercises
Assistance ex ercises  60-90 sCore exercises  2-3 minutes
Assistance ex ercises  60-90
secondsCore exercises  30 s
Assistance ex ercises  20 sd
MONDAY
Push jerk  3 min
Front squat  3 min
Incline bench pr ess  3 min
Triceps pushdown  60-90 sa
WEDNESDAY
Hang power clean  3 min
Romanian deadl ift  3 min
Seated r ow  3 min
Dumbbel l  60-90 sa alternating curl
FRIDAY
Jump shrug  3 min
Rear leg–elev ated  3 min spl it-squat
Pull-up  3 min
Single-leg sti ff-  3 min legged
deadl iftLOWER BODY (MONDAY AND
THURSDAY)
Deadl ift  2-3 min
Back squat  2-3 min
Step-up  2-3 minb
Leg (knee) curl  60-90 s
Seated cal f (heel)   60-90 s
raise
UPPER BODY (TUESDAY AND
FRIDAY)
Bench pr ess  2-3 min
Bent-over row  60-90 s
Shoulder pr ess  2-3 min
Barbell biceps curl  60-90 s
Shoulder shrug  60-90 s
Lying triceps  60-90 s
extension
Abdominal crunch  20 scWEDNESDAY
Hexagonal barbel l  30 s
deadl ift
Vertical chest pr ess  30 s
One-arm dumbbel l  30 s
row
Abdominal crunch  ≤20 s
Machine back  ≤20 s
extension
SATURDAY
Lunge  30 s
Lateral shoulder  30 s
raise
Single-leg sti ff-  30 s
legged deadl ift
Toe raise   30 s
(dorsi flexion)
Abdominal crunch  ≤20 s
1256
Machine back  ≤20 s
extension
COMMENTS
aDespi te following a str ength/power
training pr ogram, the athlete is
performing sets of 8 r eps in this
exercise, a v olume assignment f or
hypertr ophy training. Ther efore, the
length of the r est period should be 60-
90 s. The r est period f or the single-
joint ex ercises is sl ightly shorter
because f ewer muscles ar e involved.COMMENTS
bThis ex ercise is classi fied as an
assistance ex ercise and, l ike the
others, could be assigned a 60-
90 s r est period. Despi te this,
the step-up is a uni lateral
exercise that r equires mor e time
for completion of each set.
Therefore, a longer r est period is
provided.
cAlthough this athlete is tr aining
for hypertr ophy, he is perf orming
sets of 20 r eps in this ex ercise, a
volume assignment f or muscular
endur ance. Ther efore, the length
of the r est period should be ≤30
s.COMMENTS
dDespi te the short r est
periods used during a
muscular endur ance phase,
shorter r est periods can be
used f or assistance ex ercises
due to a decr eased
neuromuscular demand
compar ed to cor e exercises.
Application of All Program Design Variables: Steps
1-7
Refer to the first scenario table on page 528  for a description of the scenario athletes.
Scenario A
Female collegiate
basketball player
In-seasonScenario B
Male professional American football
lineman
Off-seasonScenario C
Male high school cross
country runner
Preseason
MONDAY (HEAVY PUSH
DAY)
Push jerka 3 × 3 @ 90 lb (41
kg)
Front squata 3 × 4 @ 155 lb
(70 kg)
Incline bench pr essa 3 × 4 @
85 lb (39 kg)
Triceps pushdownb 3 × 8 @ 40
lb (18 kg)
WEDNESDAY (HEAVY PULL
DAY)
Hang power cleana 3 × 3 @ 95
lb (43 kg)
Romanian deadl ifta 3 × 4 @
155 lb (70 kg)LOWER BODY (MONDAY AND
THURSDAY)d
Deadl ifta 3 × 10 @ 345 lb (156 kg)
Back squata 3 × 10 @ 355 lb (161 kg)
Step-upa 3 × 10 @ 190 lb (86 kg)
Leg (knee) curlb 3 × 10 @ 175 lb (79 kg)
Seated cal f (heel) r aiseb 3 × 10 @ 145 lb (66
kg)
UPPER BODY (TUESDAY AND FRIDAY)d
Bench pr essa 3 × 10 @ 225 lb (102 kg)
Bent-over rowa 3 × 10 @ 205 lb (93 kg)
Shoulder pr essa 3 × 10 @ 135 lb (61 kg)
Barbell biceps curlb 3 × 10 @ 105 lb (48 kg)
Shoulder shrugb 3 × 10 @ 375 lb (170 kg)
Lying triceps extensionb 3 × 10 @ 110 lb (50
kg)WEDNESDAY
Hexagonal barbel l
deadl ifte 3 × 12 @ 90 lb
(41 kg)
Vertical chest pr esse 3
× 12 @ 55 lb (25 kg)
One-arm dumbbel l rowe
3 × 12 @ 20 lb (9 kg)
Abdominal crunchf 3 ×
20
Machine back extensionf
3 × 15 @ 45 lb (20 kg)
SATURDAY
Lungee 3 × 12 @ 65 lb
(29 kg)
Lateral shoulder r aisef 3
× 12 @ 10 lb (5 kg)
1257
Seated r owa 3 × 4 @ 120 lb
(54 kg)
Dumbbel l alternating curlb 3 ×
8 @ 20 lb (9 kg)
FRIDAY (LIGHT MIX DAY)
Jump shruga 3 × 3 @ 35 lb
(16 kg)c
Rear leg–elev ated spl it-squata
3 × 4 @ 75 lb (34 kg)
Pull-upa 3 × 4 @ body weight
Single-leg sti ff-legged deadl ift
3 × 4 @ 35 lb (16 kg)aAbdominal crunche 3 × 20 Single-leg sti ff-legged
deadl ifte 3 × 12 10 lb (5
kg)
Toe raise (dorsi flexion)f
3 × 12 @ 20 lb (9 kg)
Abdominal crunchf 3 ×
20
Machine back extensionf
3 × 15 @ 40 lb (18 kg)
COMMENTS
a3 min r est period
b60-90 s r est period
cLoad based on appr oximately
30% of the hang power clean
estimated 1RMCOMMENTS
d80%-85% of the loads used on Monda y and
Tuesda y should be pr escribed f or the tr aining
sessions on Thursda y and Frida y, respectiv ely
e30 s r est periodCOMMENTS
f20 second r est period
KEY TERMS
1-repetition maximum (1RM)
2-for-2 rule
agonist
antagonist
assistance ex ercise
circuit training
compound set
core exercise
exercise history
exercise or der
exercise selection
exercise technique experience
goal r epetitions
individual ization
injury analysis
intensi ty
inter-set rest
load
mechanical work
microdosing
movement analysis
1258
multijoint ex ercise
multiple-RM (xRM)
muscle balance
needs analysis
overload
physiological analysis
power ex ercise
profile
program design
progression
rating of per ceived ex ertion (RPE)
repetition maximum (RM)
repetition-volume
repetitions
repetitions in r eserv e (RIR)
rest period
reversibility
SAID
set
set-repetition best (SRB)
single-joint ex ercise
specificity
split routine
structur al exercise
superset
training backgr ound
training f requency
training status
variation
velocity
volume
volume–load
volume–load displacement
STUDY QUESTIONS
  1.  A basketball coach informs you that one of her athletes needs to increase
her vertical jump performanc e. In addition to some ballistic and plyometric
training, which of the following resistance training exercises are most likely
to enhance the athlete’ s vertical jump perf ormance?
1259