# Section 18.6

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 18: Program Design for Resistance Training

**Section:** 18.6 -- Step 6: Volume

**PDF Pages:** 1241--1250

strength as the goal (e.g., Monda ys, Wednesda ys, and Fridays). It would be
difficult for the athlete to perform the same high-load, low-volume regimen—
especial ly in the power and other core exercises— with only one or two days of
rest between sessions. As noted previously , training to failure may not be
necessary to pr omote the desir ed training adaptations (36, 63, 137 , 191).
One strategy to counterbala nce the monoton y associate d with lifting heavy
loads is to alter the loads (%1RMs) for the power and other core exercises so
that only one training day each week (e.g., Monda y) is a heavy day. These
heavy-day loads are designed to be high but usually with 1 to 2 RIR to avoid
training to failure. The loads for the other training days are reduced
(intentional ly) to avoid an excessiv e accumulation of fatigue after the heavy day
while still maintaining sufficient training frequency and volume. In the example
of the three-da ys-a-week program, Wednesda y can still serve as another heavy
training day (depending on the organization of workouts) (table 18.5, page 538),
while Friday may serve as the light day of the week in which 80% of the loads
lifted in the power and other core exercises on the heavy day (Monda y) are
performed with the same number of goal repetitions. Even if the athlete is able
to perform more repetitions than the designated goal number , he or she should
not do so. This approach can be used for any training frequency . For instance, a
two-da ys-a-week program could have a heavy day and a light day, or a lower
body–upper body split routine could consist of two heavy days (one lower body
day and one upper body day) followed by two lighter days. Varying the training
loads also works well with an athlete’ s other training, in that heavy lifting days
can fall on light sport condi tioning days, and light lifting days on heavy sport
condi tioning days (42). The strength and condi tioning professional needs to
monitor this schedule so that i t does not lead to hea vy training every day.
Progression of Load
As the athlete adapts to the training stimulus, the strength and condi tioning
professional needs to have a strategy for advancing exercise loads (intensi ty or
volume depending on the specific goal) so that improvements will continue over
time (progression). Monitoring each athlete’ s training and charting his or her
response to the prescribed workouts enable the strength and condi tioning
professional to know when and to what extent the loads should be incr eased.
Timing Load Increases
A conserv ative method that can be used to increase an athlete’ s training loads is
called the 2-for-2 rule (2). If the athlete can perform 2 or more repetitions
over his or her assigned repetition goal for a given exercise in the last set in two
consecutiv e workouts, weight should be added to that exercise for the next
1241
training session . For example, a strength and condi tioning  professional assigns 3
sets of 6 repetitions in the bench press exercise, and the athlete performs all 6
repetitions in all sets. After several workout sessions (the specific number
depends on many factors), the athlete can complete 8 repetitions in the third
(last) set for two consecutiv e workouts. In the following training session, the
load for that exercise should  be increased. While the 2-for-2 rule may provide
strength and condi tioning professionals with a tool to progress load in novice
athletes, this method may eventual ly promote training to failure because it does
not account for exercise technique, the goals of a given training phase, or
relative intensi ty. For example, if an athlete modifies his or her technique just to
achiev e additional repetitions, an increase in load may not be warranted until
exercise technique becomes more stable. Moreover, programming that allows for
additional repetitions to be performed (i.e., not to failure) may be by design
(176). In this instance, strength and condi tioning professionals may plan for
athletes to perform additional repetitions beyond the amount prescribed (i.e.,
RIR) with the goal of providing an overload stimulus while managing fatigue.
Thus, it is advised that the professionals understand the limitations of the 2-for-
2 rule when adjusting the load during tr aining.
Quantity of Load Increases
The decision as to the magn itude of the load increase can be difficult to make,
but table 18.12  provides gener al recomme ndations based on the athlete’ s
condi tion (stronger or weaker) and body area (upper or lower body). Despi te
these guidel ines, the significant variation in training status, volume–loads, and
exercises (type and muscular involvement) greatly influences the appropriate
load increases. To contend with this variabi lity, relative load increases of 2.5% to
10% can be used instead of the absolute values shown in table 18.12 . However,
load changes should be specific to the exercise, loading type (e.g., free weights,
elastic bands, dumbbel ls), and the method of load progression (e.g., percentage
of 1RM, RPE, RIR, SRB).
TABLE 18.12  Examples of Load Increases
Description of the athleteaBody area exercise Estimated load increasebSet-repetition
best increasesc
Weaker, less tr ained Upper body 2.5-5 lb (1-2 kg) 5%
aThe strength and condi tioning professional will need to determine which of these two
subjectiv e categories appl ies to a speci fic athlete.
bThese load increases are appropriate for training programs using approximately 3 sets
of 5 to 10 repetitions. Note that the goal repetitions per set remain consta nt as the
loads ar e incr eased.
cA planned incr ease per week, but i t will be phase speci fic, could be lar ger incr eases.
1242
Lower body 5-10 lb (2-4 kg) 5%
Stronger , mor e trained Upper body 5-10+ lb (2-4+ kg) 5%
Lower body 10-15+ lb (4-7+ kg) 5%
aThe strength and condi tioning professional will need to determine which of these two
subjectiv e categories appl ies to a speci fic athlete.
bThese load increases are appropriate for training programs using approximately 3 sets
of 5 to 10 repetitions. Note that the goal repetitions per set remain consta nt as the
loads ar e incr eased.
cA planned incr ease per week, but i t will be phase speci fic, could be lar ger incr eases.
Application of the Training Load and Repetition
Guidelines
Refer to the first scenario table on page 528  for a description of the scenario athletes.
Scenario A
Female collegiate basketball player
In-seasonScenario B
Male professional American football
lineman
Off-seasonScenario C
Male high school
cross country
runner
Preseason
PRIMARY IN-SEASON RESISTANCE
TRAINING GOAL
Strength/powerPRIMARY OFF-SEASON RESISTANCE
TRAINING GOAL
Hypertr ophyPRIMARY
PRESEASON
RESISTANCE
TRAINING GOAL
Muscular
endur ance
TESTING AND ASSIGNING LOADS
AND REPS
Influence of the training goals
Power ex ercises:  75%-85% of the 1RM;
3-5 repsa
Other cor e exercises:  >85% of the 1RM;
<6 reps
Assistance ex ercises:  limited to loads not
heavier than an 8RMTESTING AND ASSIGNING LOADS
AND REPS
Influence of the training goals
67%-80% of the 1RM; 8-12 r epsTESTING AND
ASSIGNING
LOADS AND
REPS
Influence of the
training goals
<67% of the 1RM;
>12 r eps
Number of goal reps
Power ex ercises:  3
Core exercises:  4
Assistance ex ercises:  8Number of goal reps
Core exercises:  10
Assistance ex ercises:  10Number of goal
reps
Core exercises:  12
Assistance
exercises:  15
Testing methods
3RM testing for power exercisesb
Push jerkTesting methods
1RM testing for core exercises
Deadl iftTesting methods
6RM testing for
core exercises
1243
Hang power clean
1RM testing for other core
exercisesc
Front squat
Incline bench pr ess
Seated r ow
8RM testing for assistance
exercisesd
Dumbbel l alternating curl
Triceps pushdownBack squati
Bench pr essi
Shoulder pr essi
10RM testing for new assistance
exercisesj
Step-up
Seated cal f (heel) r aise
Bent-over row
Shoulder shrugHexagonal barbel l
deadl ift
Lunge
Vertical chest pr ess
8RM testing for
new assistance
exercises
One-arm dumbbel l
row
Lateral shoulder
raise
Testing results
3RM hang power  115 lb (52 kg)
clean
Estimated 1RMe  124 lb (56 kg)
3RM push jerk  110 lb (50 kg)
Estimated 1RMe  118 lb (54 kg)
1RM f ront squat  185 lb (84 kg)
1RM incl ine bench  100 lb (45 kg)
press
1RM seated r ow  120 lb (54 kg)
8RM dumbbel l  25 lb (11 kg)
alternating curl
8RM triceps  50 lb (23 kg) pushdownTesting results
1RM deadl ift  650 lb (295 kg)
1RM back squat  675 lb (306 kg)
1RM bench pr ess  425 lb (193 kg)
1RM shoulder pr ess  255 lb (116 kg)
10RM step-up  205 lb (93 kg)
10RM seated cal f  155 lb (70 kg)
(heel) r aise
10RM bent -over row  215 lb (98 kg)
10RM shoulder  405 lb (184 kg) shrugTesting results
6RM hexagonal
barbel l deadl ift  
135 lb (61 kg)
Estimated
1RMe  160 lb
(73 kg)
6RM lunge  100
lb (45 kg)
Estimated
1RMe  120 lb
(54 kg)
6RM v ertical
chest  85 lb (39
kg) pr ess
Estimated
1RMe  100 lb
(45 kg)
8RM one- arm  
35 lb (16 kg)
dumbbel l row
8RM later al  15
lb (7 kg) shoulder
raise
Training loads
For power ex ercises:
Assign 75% of the estimated 1RM
Push jerk  90 lb (41 kg)
Hang power clean  95 lb (43 kg)
(All loads ar e rounded of f to the near est
5 lb.)
For other cor e exercises:
Assign 85% of the tested 1RM
Front squat  155 lb (70 kg)
Incline bench pr ess  85 lb (39 kg)
Seated r ow  120 lb (54 kg)Training loads
For cor e exercises:
Assign 70% of the tested 1RM
Deadl ift  490 lb (222 kg)
Back squat  505 lb (229 kg)
Bench pr ess  320 lb (145 kg)
Shoulder pr ess  190 lb (86 kg)
(All loads ar e rounded of f to the near est 5
lb.)
For assistance ex ercises:
Assign loads less than the loads f rom the
10RM testingg orTraining loads
For cor e exercises:
Assign <67% of
the estimated 1RM
For assistance
exercises:
Assign loads less
than the loads
from 8RM testingg
1244
(All loads ar e rounded of f to the near est
5 lb.)
For assistance ex ercises:
Assign loads less than the loads f rom
8RM testinggEqual to the loads used in the postseason
Leg (knee) curl  190 lb (86 kg)
Barbell biceps curl  115 lb (52 kg)
Lying triceps  125 lb (57 kg) extension
Weekly loading regimen  (power/cor e
exercises)f
Monda ys (“hea vy” push da y)
Assign the f ull load assignments
(calculated under “T raining loads”)
Wednesda ys (“hea vy” pul l day)
Assign the f ull load assignments
(calculated under “T raining loads”)
Fridays (“light” mix da y)
Assign only 80% of Monda y’s and
Wednesda y’s “hea vy da y” loads i f
exercises ar e repeatedhWeekly loading regimen  includes a
heavy and l ight emphasis on the lower
and upper body da ys
Monda ys (“Hea vy” lower body da y)
Tuesda ys (“Hea vy” upper body da y)
Thursda ys (“Light ” lower body da y)
Fridays (“Light ” upper body da y)
Assign 80%-85% of the hea vy da y loads
during the l ight da y training sessionsh
COMMENTS
aThe load and r ep assignments shown
for power ex ercises ar e based on
basketball, a mul tiple-ef fort ev ent, and
are not consistent wi th the %1RM–
repetition relationship .
bTo test f or power , an xRM (3RM)
protocol is used. Fr om the r esult, the
1RM is estimated and load assignments
are made b y calculating a per cent of the
estimated 1RM.
cThe athlete perf ormed these ex ercises
in the pr eseason, but to r aise the
accuracy of the load assignments f or the
in-season, the athlete wi ll be tested to
determine the curr ent 1RM.
dEven though some of these ex ercises
were part of the pr eseason pr ogram,
they al l require xRM testing because the
in-season goal r eps for these ex ercises is
8, rather than 10 f rom the pr evious
season.
eEstimate the 1RM using table 18.9 .
fThe loads f or the assistance ex ercises
remain constant thr oughout the week;
only the loads f or the power and other
core exercises change.
gPrescribing loads that ar e submaximal
to the xRM testing wi ll help athletes
avoid consistent tr aining to f ailure.COMMENTS
iThe athlete perf ormed these ex ercises in
the postseason, but to r aise the ac curacy
of the load assignments f or the of f-
season, the athlete wi ll be tested to
determine the curr ent 1RM.
jThe ex ercises shown her e wer e selected
as new ex ercises f or the of f-season
program and ther efore require 10RM
testing. The other assistance ex ercises
were carried o ver from the postseason
and do not r equire testing because the
load and r ep assignments wi ll be identical.
1245
hPrescribing hea vy and l ight loads wi th
the same ex ercises during the week ma y
help manage f atigue and pr event
consistently tr aining to f ailure. Even if
the athlete is able to , do not al low mor e
reps than the designated goal number
(power , 3; other cor e, 4).
1246
Step 6: Volume
Volume–load relates to the total amount of weight lifted in a training session,
and a set is a group of repetitions sequential ly performed before the athlete
stops to rest. Repetition-volume is the total number of repetitions performed
during a workout session, and volume–load is the total number of sets multiplied
by the number of repetitions per set, then multiplied by the weight lifted per
repetition. For example, the volume–load for 2 sets of 10 repetitions with 50
pounds (23 kg) would be expressed as 2 × 10 × 50 pounds or 1,000 pounds
(454 kg). (If different sets are performed with different amounts of weight, the
volumes per set are calculated and then added to obtain the total training
session v olume. )
In running exercise, the common (rep) volume measur e is distance. If an
intensi ty value is known or measur ed (e.g., running pace, which relates to
percent V̇O2max), total metabol ic energy cost (which is proportional to
mechanical work done) can be calculated. This value is compar able to volume–
load in resistan ce exercise. The same concepts are applicable to the number of
foot or hand contacts (volume) in plyometric exercise (note that the intensi ty is
not consider ed when counting  contacts but should be considered carefully by the
coach), the number of strokes (volume) in swimming or rowing, or the number
of thr ows or jumps (v olume) f or various sport activi ties.
Single Versus Multiple Sets
Single-set training may be appropriate for untrained individuals (50) or during
the first several months of training (61), but many studies indicate that higher
volumes are necessary to promote further gains in strength, especial ly for
intermediate and advanced resistance-tr ained athletes (126, 177, 182). For
example, performing 3 sets of 10 repetitions without going to failure enhances
strength better than one set to failure in 8 to 12 repetitions (90), although the
higher training volume with the use of 3 sets is a contributing factor (50, 162).
Therefore, an athlete who performs multiple sets from the initiation of their
resistance training program will increase muscular strength faster than with
single-set training (90). The strength and condi tioning professional cannot
expect, howev er, that an athlete will be able to successfully complete multiple
sets with full RM loads at fixed repetition schemes for every exercise in each
training session. Fatigue will affect the number of repetitions that can be
performed in later sets (116, 150), which is why a RIR approach may be
advantageous. It should also be noted that training to failure is not necessary for
optimal adaptations (36, 63, 137, 191). Refalo and colleagues (132) also
demonstr ated that the closer the proximity to failure, the greater the magni tude
1247
of fatigue over the subsequen t 24 hours, which should be carefully consider ed in
relation to the additional training planned for that period. As such, this also
highlights a limitation of the RIR approach, in that it has been clearly
demonstr ated that the further away from failure, the less accurate the RIR
approach is (6, 70).
Training Status
The training status of athlet es affects the volume they will be able to safely
tolerate. It is appropriate for an athlete to perform only 1 or 2 sets as a beginner
and to add sets as he or she becomes better trained. As the athlete adapts to a
consistent and well-designed program, more sets can be added gradual ly to
match the guidel ines associated wi th the giv en training goal.
Primary Resistance Training Goal
Training volume is directly based on the athlete’ s resistance training goal. Table
18.13  provides a summary of the guidel ines for the number of repetitions and
sets commonly associated with strength, power , hypertr ophy, and muscular
endur ance training programs. When programming weightl ifting exercises and
their derivatives, loads and the associated repetition schemes may vary from
other forms of power training, because weightl ifting pulling derivatives (i.e.,
those that exclude the catch phase) permi t loads greater than the 1RM
associated with the catching variation (21). In addition, reduced displacement
during some of these exercises (i.e., countermo vement shrug, hang pull, power
clean) also permi ts the performance of 6 repetitions without decreases in
velocity of power acr oss repetitions (113, 114) ( table 18.14 ).
TABLE 18.13  Volume Assignments Based on the Training Goal
Training
goalGoal repetitions Setsa
NOVICE INTERMEDIATE ADVANCED NOVICE INTERMEDIATE ADVANCED
Strength ≤6 ≤6 ≤6 1-3 ≥3 ≥3
Power:  b n/a 1-3 1-3 n/a 1-3 3-6
aThese assignments do not include w arm-up sets and t ypical ly apply to cor e exercises only .
bBased on weightl ifting movements (clean, snatch, jerk) and their derivatives. The load and repetition
assignments shown  for power in this table are not consis tent with the %1RM–r epetition relationship . In
nonexplosiv e movements, loads equal ing about 80% of the 1RM apply to the 2- to 5-repetition range.
Refer to the discussion of assigning per centages of the 1RM f or power tr aining f or further explanation.
cA higher number of repetitions may be performed without changes in velocity or power if the range of
motion and complexi ty is reduced (113, 114), or i f cluster sets ar e used.
dA low number of repetitions for hypertr ophy should be mixed with a higher number of sets (e.g., 10 sets
of 3 r epetitions).
Data f rom Fleck and Kr aemer (2014); Stone and O’B ryant (1987); T esch (1992).
1248
Single-ef fort
event
Multiple-
effort ev entn/a 3-6c3-6c n/a 1-3c3-6c
Hypertr ophy8-12 6-12 3-12 1-3 ≥3 ≥3d
Muscular
endur ance12-15 12-15 12-25 1-3 ≥3 ≥3
aThese assignments do not include w arm-up sets and t ypical ly apply to cor e exercises only .
bBased on weightl ifting movements (clean, snatch, jerk) and their derivatives. The load and repetition
assignments shown  for power in this table are not consis tent with the %1RM–r epetition relationship . In
nonexplosiv e movements, loads equal ing about 80% of the 1RM apply to the 2- to 5-repetition range.
Refer to the discussion of assigning per centages of the 1RM f or power tr aining f or further explanation.
cA higher number of repetitions may be performed without changes in velocity or power if the range of
motion and complexi ty is reduced (113, 114), or i f cluster sets ar e used.
dA low number of repetitions for hypertr ophy should be mixed with a higher number of sets (e.g., 10 sets
of 3 r epetitions).
Data f rom Fleck and Kr aemer (2014); Stone and O’B ryant (1987); T esch (1992).
Strength and Power
In classic resear ch, DeLorme (39) and DeLorme and Watkins (40) recommended
sets of 10 repetitions as ideal to increase muscular strength, although the
regimen was original ly developed for injury rehabi litation. Later, Berger (9, 10)
determined that 3 sets of 6 repetitions created maximal strength gains, at least
in the bench press and back squat exercises. Although Berger’s work seemed to
be conclusive, his subsequent resear ch (11) showed no significant difference
among 6 sets of a 2RM load, 3 sets of a 6RM load, and 3 sets of a 10RM load,
despite the differences in volume. Since then, the results of many other studies
have also been unable to support an exact set and repetition scheme to promote
maximal increases in strength; howev er, these inconclusiv e findings may be the
result of a mixture of relatively untrained and trained subjects, as well as varying
programming tactics.
When training an athlete for strength, assigning volume begins with an
examination of the optimal number of repetitions for maximal strength gains. As
discussed earlier (and shown in figure 18.10  and table 18.11 ), this appears to be
sets of 6 or fewer repetitions (at the corresponding RM load [≥85% 1RM]) for
core exercises (125, 182). Peterson and colleagues (125, 126) also highlighted a
dose–r esponse relationship based on the number of sets performed per muscle
group: 8 sets per muscle group elicited the greatest increases in strength, with
loads of 85% of the 1RM. More recently , similar conclusions were made by
Swinton and colleagues (182) based on the results of their meta- analysis of the
dose–r esponse to resistance training. Specific set guidel ines based on exercise
1249
type suggest that only 1 to 3 sets may be appropriate or necessary for
assistance ex ercises (2).
Volume assign ments for power training are typical ly lower than those for
strength training to maximiz e the quality of exercise. This reduction in volume
results from fewer goal repetitions and lighter loads (figure 18.10  and table
18.11 ) rather than the recommended number of sets (30, 68, 105). The
common guide line is 3 to 5 sets (after warm-up) for power exercises included in
a trained athlete’ s program (161).
TABLE 18.14  Weightlifting Exercises and Derivatives,
Including Recommended Intensities and Repetition Ranges
Catching
derivativesaLoad
(reps) Pulling derivativesbLoad (reps)Overhead
pressing
derivativesLoad
(reps)
Mid-thigh clean;
snatch60%-80%
1RM (2-5)Mid-thigh pul l;
countermo vement
shrug100%-140%
1RM (4-6c,d)Push pr ess 70%-90%
1RM (2-5)
Clean; snatch
from the knee70%-90%
1RM (2-5)Pull from the knee;
hang pul lPush jerk
Hang clean;
snatchcPull from the floor 80%-120%
1RM (2-6d)Split jerk
Clean; snatch Hang high pul l 45%-60% 1RM
(4-6)Behind the neck
push pr ess/jerkb
Jump shrug 30%-45% 1RM
(4-6)Behind the neck
split jerkb
aAll clean and snatch v ariations can be perf ormed wi th a partial squat (power) or f ull squat catch.
bThe deriv atives ma y be perf ormed wi th either a clean or snatch grip .
cSix reps can be perf ormed wi th no decr ease in v elocity or power between r eps (113, 114).
dHigher r eps ma y be perf ormed pr ovided that the technique of the ex ercise is maintained (91, 141).
Note:  Variations from mid-thigh and the knee can start with the barbel l resting on blocks, or with the
athlete holding the barbel l and lowering to the start position and briefly pausing. Currently, there is
minimal r esear ch comparing the kinetics or kinematics of these v ariations.
Adapted f rom Comf ort et al. (2023). Data f rom Kirksey and Stone (1998); S cala et al. (1987).
Hypertrophy
It is gener ally accepted that higher training volumes  are associated with
increases in muscular size (96, 139, 143). This is the result of both a moder ate
to highe r number of repetitions per set (8-12; see figure 18.10 and table 18.11)
and the comm only recomme nded 3 to 6 sets per exercise (91, 123). Howev er,
there does not appear to be a meaningf ul difference in training-induced
hypertr ophy of a specific muscle group between higher and lower frequencies
1250