# Chapter 19: Program Design and Technique for Plyometric Training

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

**PDF Pages:** 1260--1397

CHAPTER  19
PROGRAM DESIGN AND
TECHNIQUE FOR
PLYOMETRIC TRAINING
Chris A. Bailey, PhD, and Clive Brewer, MSc
The authors would like to acknowledge the significant contributions of David H. Potach
and Donald A. Chu to this chapter .
After completing this chapter, you will be able to
explain the ph ysiology of ply ometric ex ercise;
identi fy the phases of the str etch-shortening cy cle;
identi fy the components of a ply ometric tr aining pr ogram;
design a saf e and ef fective plyometric tr aining pr ogram;
prescribe ef fective plyometric ex ercise pr ogressions and
regressions f or a v ariety of individuals;
recommend pr oper equipment f or use during ply ometric
exercise; and
teach corr ect ex ecution of lower and upper body ply ometric
exercises.
Plyometric exercise  refers to those  activities that enable a muscle
to reach maximal force in the shortest possible time. Plyometric  is a
1260
combination of Greek words that literally means to increase
measur ement (plio = more; metric  = measur e) (67). Practical ly
defined, plyometric exercise is a quick, powerf ul movement using a
prestretch, or countermo vement, that involves the stretch-
shortening cycle (SSC) (64). Furthermor e, plyometric exercises are
typical ly classified as being either ballistic or rebounding. Ballistic
exercises  are those that minimal ly include contributions from the
neuromuscular component of the SSC (e.g., squat jump, medicine
ball overhead throw). In contrast, rebound exercises  are those
that require physiomechanical SSC contributions (e.g., drop jumps or
repeat counte rmovement jumps). This classification is important
because it determines the specific neuromuscular and mechanical
demands of each exercise (37). The purpose of plyometric exercise
is to increase the power of subsequent movements by using both
the natural elastic component s of muscle and tendon and the stretch
reflex. To effectively use plyometrics as part of a training program, it
is important to understand the mechanics and physiology of
plyometric exercise, the principles of plyometric training program
design, and the methods of safely and effectively performing specific
plyometric ex ercises.
1261
Plyometric Mechanics and Physiology
Functional movements and athletic success depend on both the
proper function of all active muscles and the velocity at which these
muscular forces are used. The term used to define this force–velocity
relationship is power . When properly implemented, plyometric
training consistently improves an athlete’ s ability to produce muscle
force and power (34, 59). This enhancement affects the impulse an
athlete can gener ate. Impuls e, defined as the integr al of force over
time, directly influences an athlete’ s performance by changing
momentum. Specifically, an increased impulse leads to greater
momentum, which allows athletes to accelerate and deceler ate more
effectively. These rapid changes in velocity are crucial performance
qualities across a wide range of sports. These increases are best
explained by two proposed models: mechanical and
neurophysiological (64).
Mechanical Model of Plyometric Exercise
In the mechanical model, elastic energy in the musculotendinous
components is increased with a rapid stretch and then stored (3, 16,
35). When this movement is immediately followed by a concentric
muscle action,  the stored elastic energy is released, increasing the
total force production (3, 16, 35). Of the mechanical model’s many
elements, it is the series elastic component (SEC) that is the
workhorse of plyometric exercise. While the SEC includes some
muscular components, it is the tendons that consti tute the majori ty
of the SEC. When the musculotendinous unit is stretched, as in an
eccentric muscle action, the SEC acts as a spring and is lengthened;
as it lengthe ns, elastic energy is stored and released with
subsequent concentric actions. Figure 19.1 provides a schematic
illustration of the components of the S SC.
1262
FIGURE 19.1 Mechanical mode l of skeletal muscle function. The series elastic component
(SEC), when stretched, stores elastic energy that increases the force produced. The
contractile compone nt (CC) (i.e., actin, myosin, and crossbridges) is the primary source of
muscle force during concentric muscle action. The parallel elastic compone nt (PEC) (i.e.,
epimysium, perim ysium, endom ysium , and sarcolemma) exerts a passive force with
unstimulated muscle str etch.
Adapted from Albert (1995).
Neurophysiological Model of Plyometric
Exercise
The neurophysiological mode l involves the potentiation  (change in
the force–velocity characteristics of the muscle’ s contractile
components caused by stretch [25]) of the concentric muscle action
by use of the stretch reflex (9-12). The stretch reflex  is the body’s
involuntary response to an external stimulus that stretches the
muscles (31, 49). This reflexiv e component of plyometric exercise is
primari ly composed of muscle spindle activity. Muscle spindles  are
proprioceptiv e organs that are sensitive to the rate and magnitude of
a stretch; when a quick stretch is detected, muscular activity
reflexiv ely increases (31, 49). During plyometric exercises, the
muscle spindles are stimulate d by a rapid stretch, causing a reflexiv e
muscle action. The series elastic component (SEC)  and parallel
elastic comp onent (PEC)  are two elastic structur es that can be
stretched within the muscle during plyometric exercises. The SEC
includes tendons and muscle fiber crossbridges. The PEC contains
1263
collagenous structur es (e.g., fascicular membr anes), which provide
stability and protection to musculatur e. This reflexiv e response
potentiates, or increases, the activity in the agonist muscle, thereby
increasing the force the muscle produces (9-12, 41). As in the
mechanical model, if a concentric muscle action does not
immediately follow a stretch (i.e., if there is too long a time between
stretch and concentric action  or movement over too large a range),
the potentiating abi lity of the str etch r eflex is negated.
Enhancements in measur ement techniques using force platforms
(kinetic data), motion captur e (kinematic data), and
electr omyography (motor unit activation) have demonstr ated that
the mechanical and neurophysiological models contribu te to the
increased production of force seen during plyometric exercise (3, 9-
12, 16, 35, 41). For example, Jarvis and colleagues (37) have
reported that rebound activities elicit enhanced neurophysiological
contributions when compar ed to ballistic activities and that increased
mechanical outputs exhibi ted during high-impact plyometrics are
largely the result of mechanical factors associated with potential
energy production (i.e. , mechanical contributions).
Stretch-Shortening  Cycle
The stretch-shortening cycle (SSC)  employs the energy storage
capabi lities of the SEC and stimulation of the stretch reflex to
facilitate a maximal increase in muscle recruitment over a minimal
amount of time. The SSC involves three distinct phases as shown in
table 19.1. While the table delineates the SSC’s individual mechanical
and neurophysiological events during each phase, it is important to
remember that all the events listed do not necessari ly occur within
the given phase. That is, some of the events may last longer  or may
require less time than allowed in the given phase. Phase I is the
eccentric phase, which is the time from resting position to the
bottom of the countermo vement that involves preloading the agonist
muscle group or groups. During this phase, the SEC stores elastic
energy, and the muscle spindles are stimulated. As the muscle
1264
spindles are stretched, they send a signal to the ventral root of the
spinal cor d via the t ype Ia afferent nerv e fibers.
TABLE 19.1  Stretch-Shortening Cycle
Phase Action Physiological event
I—Eccentric Stretch of the agonist
muscleElastic ener gy is stor ed in the series elastic
component.
Muscle spindles ar e stimulated.
II—
AmortizationPause between phases I
and IIIType Ia afferent nerv es synapse wi th alpha
motor neur ons.
Alpha motor neur ons tr ansmi t signals to
agonist muscle gr oup.
III—
ConcentricShortening of agonist
muscle fibersElastic ener gy is r eleased f rom the series
elastic component.
Alpha motor neur ons stimulate the agonist
muscle gr oup.
To visual ize the eccentric phase, consider a countermo vement
vertical jump. Stretch reflex latency  (the time from reflex
stimulation to the beginning of agonist muscle activity) largely
depends on nerve conduction velocities and therefore increases with
greater distances from the spinal cord (i.e., longer nerves) (40, 42,
44, 54). Quadriceps and gastrocnemius stretch reflexes typical ly
range from 20 to 30 milliseconds and from 30 to 45 milliseconds,
respectiv ely (40, 53).
Phase II is the time between  the eccentric and concentric phases
and is termed the amortization  (or coupling ) phase . This is the
time from the end of the eccentric phase to the initiation of the
concentric muscle action. There is a delay between the eccentric and
concentric muscle actions during which type Ia afferent nerves
synapse with the alpha motor neurons in the ventral root of the
spinal cord. The alpha motor neurons then transmi t signals to the
agonist muscle  group. This phase of the SSC is perhaps the most
crucial in allowing greater power production; its duration must be
kept short. If the amortization phase lasts too long, the energy
1265
stored during the eccentric phase dissipates as heat, and the stretch
reflex will not increase muscle activity during the upcoming
concentric phase (14). Resear ch has shown that increasing time in
the amortization phase results in increases in elastic energy lost in
the bench press compar ed to no delay between eccentric and
concentric phases (ener gy losses were 0.35 s = 25%, 0.9 s = 52%,
1 s = 55%, and 1.5 s = 70%) (66). Consider the countermo vement
vertical jump mentioned earlier. Once the countermo vement has
stopped, the amortization phase has begun. As soon as movement
begins again, the amortization phase has ended.
The concentric phase , phase III, is the body’s response to the
eccentric and amortization phases. In this phase, the energy stored
in the SEC during the eccentric phase either is used to increase the
force of the subsequent movement or is dissipated as heat. This
stored elastic energy increases the force produced during the
concentric phase movement beyond that of an isolated concentric
muscle action  (15, 58). In addition, the alpha motor neurons
stimulate the agonist muscle group, resulting in a reflexiv e
concentric muscle action (i.e., the stretch reflex). The efficiency of
these subsystems is essential to the proper performance of
plyometric exercises. Again, visual ize the vertical jump. As soon as
movement begins in an upward direction, the amortization phase
has ended, and the concentric phase of the SSC has begun. In this
example, one of the agonist muscles is the quadriceps (rectus
femoris, vastus lateralis, vastus medial is, vastus intermedius). During
the countermo vement, the quadriceps under goes a rapid stretch
(eccentric phase); there is a delay in movement (amortization
phase), and then the muscle concentrical ly extends the knee,
allowing the athlete to push of f the gr ound (concentric phase).
The rate of musculotendinous stretch is vital to plyometric
exercise (41). This can be influenced by the type of plyometric
activity and the ground contact technique (13). A high stretch rate
results in greater muscle recruitment and activity during the SSC
concentric phase. The importance of the stretch rate may be
1266
illustrated by three different vertical jump tests: a static squat jump,
a countermo vement jump, and an approach jump with several steps.
As the rate of stretch increases, an athlete’ s absolute performance in
these tests improves; the static squat jump results in the lowest
jump height, and the approach jump results in the highest. The
static squat jump requires the athlete to get into a squat ting position
(i.e., 90-degr ee hip flexion and 90-degr ee knee flexion) followed by
a jump up. This jump does not use stored elastic energy and is too
slow to allow potentiation from the stretch reflex because there is
essential ly no eccentric phase. The countermo vement jump uses a
rapid eccentric element (i.e., a partial squat) followed immediately
by rapid concentr ic muscle activity (i.e., a jump up). The rapid
eccentric phase  allows the athlete to store and use elastic energy in
the stretched musculotendinous unit and stimulates the stretch
reflex, thereby potentiating muscle activity (7, 33). The approach
(one- or two-step) jump uses an even quicker, more forceful
eccentric phase than the countermo vement jump; the increased rate
of stretch during the eccentric phase allows a further increase in
vertical jump height (4 , 6, 8, 29).
The type of ground contact (and, hence, the rate of stretch and
duration of the amortization  phase, which affects the return of
elastic energy) is influenced by the technique used during rebound
actions. Cappa and Behm (13) demonstr ated that flat-foot landing
techniques resulted in significantly longer ground contact times in
comparison to active forefoot landings (which also had a 45%
greater rate of force production) due to the increased contribution of
neuromuscular and elastic force production. Strength and
condi tioning professionals should note that technique is therefore an
essential factor in the effectiveness of the SSC, rate of force
development, and subsequent kinematic v ariables of the mo vement.
Strength and conditioning professionals may consider
that the duration of the amortization phase may lead to
activities that promote different movement
1267
characteristics. To this end, Schmidtbleicher (56)
categorized plyometric activities as either slow SSC
(>0.25 s) or fast SSC (<0.25 s), depending on their
ground contact time.
As well as enhancing nonvoluntary neuromuscular outputs, the
SSC serves a protectiv e function within the myotendinous structur es
of the musculosk eletal system. The Golgi tendon organ is
encapsulated within the serial components of the myotendinous
junction. This is a proprioceptiv e mechanism that detec ts the rate
and magni tude of force being applied to the respectiv e tendon and
will cause an inverse stretch reflex to occur past a tensile threshold,
which immediately inhibi ts the excitatory signal through the motor
neuron to the motor unit. Progressive plyometric training serves to
desensi tize the Golgi tendon organ, thus increasing the excitability
potential of the motor uni t for incr eased perf ormance gains.
The SSC combines mech anical and neurophysiological
mechanisms and is the basis of plyometric exercise. A
rapid eccent ric muscle action stimulates the stretch
reflex and storage of elastic energy, which results  in an
increase in the force produced during the subse quent
concentric action.
1268
Program Design
Plyometric exercise prescription is similar to resistance and aerobic
exercise prescriptions—mode, intensi ty, frequency , duration, volume,
density, technique development and progression, and a warm-up
period must all be dynamic variables incorpor ated in the design of a
sound plyometric training program. Unfortunately , there is minimal
resear ch demar cating optimal program variables for the design of
plyometric exercise programs. Therefore, when prescribing
plyometric exercise, strength  and condi tioning professionals must
rely on the available resear ch, practical experience, and the
increasing availability of motion captur e and force plate technology
to guide decision making.
Needs Analysis
To properly design a plyometric training program, the strength and
condi tioning professional must analyz e the needs of the athlete by
evaluating his or her sport, sport position, anthropometry , and
training status. Each sport and position has its own unique
requirements; some requirements are unique because of the
movements involved, while others have distinctiv e injury profiles and
risks. The anthropometry of the athlete is important, because
heavier athletes face exponential ly higher loads in gravity-assisted
exercises than athletes with a lower mass; therefore, athletes’ body
weight and their strength relative to their body weight become
important consider ations. Further , each athlete possesses a unique
training status ; some may be new to training and have never
performed plyometric exercises, while others may have been injured.
Each of these populations of athletes requires a different approach
to plyometric training. By understanding each sport’s individual
requirements, the positions within the sport, and the needs of each
athlete, the strength and condi tioning professional is better able to
design a saf e, effective plyometric tr aining pr ogram.
1269
Mode
The mode of plyometric training is determined by the body region
performing the given exercise. For example, a single-leg hop is a
lower body rebounding plyometric exercise, while a two-hand
kneeling medicine ball throw is an upper body exercise that is
performed ballistical ly. Modes of plyometric exercise are discussed in
the par agraphs that f ollow.
Lower Body Plyometrics
Lower body plyometrics are appropriate for virtual ly any athlete and
any sport or rehabi litation context. Because most sports require
athletes to produce a maximal amount of muscular force in a short
amount of time, lower body plyometrics provide an ideal and highly
variable training stimulus that positively transfers training benefi ts to
a variety of sports. For example, sprinters require sagittal plane
movements, whereas most other sports require comb inations of
sagittal plane, frontal plane, and occasional transverse plane
movements to be successful in competi tion. Demand can differ
within positions in each sport: A middle blocker in volleyball may
require predominantly lateral and vertical movements, whereas an
outside hitter may have an increased emphasis on horizontal into
vertical movements. American footbal l, basebal l, soccer, and
basketball athletes must make quick, powerf ul movements and
changes of direction in all planes to compete successfully. A
basketball center is an example of an athlete who would benefi t
greatly from a plyometric training program, because the center is
required to jump repeatedly for rebounds. To be successful, the
center must be able to out-jump the opposing center in order to
rebound more loose balls. Conversely , center backs in soccer may
benefi t from more ballistic actions, because they will typical ly
accelerate into a jump f rom a running start into a single-f oot tak eoff.
Lower body plyometric training also gives the ability to produce
more force in a shorter amount of time, thereby allowing a higher
jump. This should also guide the strength and condi tioning
1270
professional to consider that plyometric session design is not limited
to actions purely in the sagittal plane, and the transition from one
foot to two feet, two feet to one foot, one foot to the other, or one
leg to the same leg are often as important for performance
enhancement as two-f ooted actions.
Aerobic endur ance athletes can also benefi t from participation in a
plyometric training program, because repetitive efforts that have
neurophysiological and mechanical properties to optimiz e movement
efficiency improve running and cycling econom y by allowing muscles
to produce mor e force with less ener gy.
The various lower body plyometric drills have differing intensi ty
levels and directional movements. The types of lower body
plyometric drills include singular and repetitive actions (e.g.,
bounds ) using one foot (hop) or both feet (jump ), which  may be
transitional, in-place, or involve objects such as a box (e.g., a box
jump ) or hur dle. S ee table 19.2  for a description of these dri lls.
TABLE 19.2  Lower Body Plyometric Drills
Type Description
Hops Takeoff from one f oot and landing on the same f oot. V olume is ei ther
measur ed by distance tr aveled or number of f oot contacts. This mo vement
develops ac celeration and deceler ation capabi lities in a single l imb, with
intensi ty defined b y displacement v elocity and v olume defined b y foot
contacts. These dri lls ma y be singular (bal listic hop) that is in place or
horizontal, or r eactiv e (mul tiple r epetitive actions f or height or distance).
Bounds Takeoff from one f oot and landing, or tr ansitioning thr ough, to the other f oot.
Depending on the tr aining status of the athlete (r ehab vs. perf ormance), these
drills ma y be singular (bal listic bound) or r eactiv e (mul tiple r epetitive actions
with alternating gr ound contact). B ounds ma y result in gr eater horiz ontal
velocity than hops and jumps and ther efore are ideal f or dev eloping
accelerations and deceler ations wi th bilateral weight tr ansfer. Intensi ty is
defined b y the horiz ontal v elocity of the action. V olume is t ypical ly measur ed
by distance but ma y be thr ough the number of r epetitions perf ormed.
Jumps Takeoff and landing wi th two f eet that ma y be horiz ontal or v ertical in natur e.
The height or length of a jump determines the intensi ty of the action. V olume
is determined b y the number of f oot contacts. Jumps ma y be in place, ha ve
1271
Type Description
multiple r epetitive actions, in volve equipment such as bo xes or hur dles, or
consist of a combination of these at tributes.
Depth
jumps
and
depth
hopsDepth jumps and hops (“shock” actions) use gr avity and the athlete’ s weight
to incr ease ex ercise intensi ty. The athlete assumes a posi tion on a bo x, steps
off, lands, and immediately tr ansitions v ertical ly, horiz ontally, later ally, or to
another bo x. The height of the bo x determines the intensi ty of the action, and
the volume is determined b y the number of f oot contacts. R epetitive jumps
onto bo xes or o ver barriers ma y be added in sequence.
Upper Body Plyometrics
Rapid, powerf ul upper body movements are requisi tes for several
sports and activities, including basebal l, softbal l, tennis, golf, and
throws in track and field (i.e., the shot put, discus, and javelin). For
example, an elite basebal l pitcher routinely throws a basebal l at 80
to 100 miles per hour (129-1 61 km/h). It is important to understand
that to reach velocities of this magni tude, throwing actions have to
be initiated with the legs and require hip–shoulder separ ation and
high rotational velocities in the hip and thoracic spine (e.g., a
basebal l pitcher’s shoulder joint must move at more than 6,000
degrees per s) (23, 26, 27, 53). Plyometric training of the shoulder
joint may not only increase pitching velocity, but it also may prevent
injury to the shoulder and elbow joints. Such upper body actions
need to be linked with impulses gener ated through segmental
actions initiated in the lower body if they are to be effective in the
transfer to perf ormance.
Plyometric drills for the upper  body are not used as often as those
for the lower body and have been studied less extensiv ely, but they
are nonetheless essential to athletes who require upper body power
(52). Plyometrics for the upper body (e.g., throws  and slams ) are
typical ly bal listic in natur e (table 19.3 ).
TABLE 19.3  Upper Body Plyometric Drills
Type Description
1272
Type Description
Throws Single or both arms pr ojecting a medicine bal l or other external weight ei ther
horizontally or v ertical ly. Progressions include incr eased mass of the implement,
increased tar get distance, or change of emphasis in complexi ty of the mo vement
(e.g., kneel ing vs. standing thr ow).
Slams Gener ally, a double- arm mo vement f orcefully bringing a medicine bal l or other
implement dir ectly down to the gr ound. Pr ogressions include incr eased mass of
the medicine bal l or incr eased tar get velocity of the medicine bal l.
Pull Ballistical ly pul ling the body in a v ertical dir ection such as an explosiv e supine
row or a pul l-up. The posi tion of the center of mass and r ange of action wi ll be
determined b y the athlete’ s strength and mo vement competence.
Push Pressing the body a way from the gr ound in a pr one posi tion. Pr ogressions need
to consider the athlete’ s relative strength lev els and include incorpor ating shock
methodology wi th varying depth of dr op-to-gr ound contact, decr easing fl ight
time to incr ease mo vement v elocity, or incr easing complexi ty through later al or
overhead mo vements.
Note:  Although these are classified as upper body movements, some throws and slams are
total body in nature. If the upper body is not isolated, many actions are initiated with the
hips, knees, and ankles and a postural force-mul tiplication enables the object to be
projected from the upper body. This is entirely appropriate if this is a desired objectiv e
within the athlete’ s program.
Trunk Plyometrics
In general, it is difficult to perform true plyometric drills that directly
target trunk musculatur e (table 19.4) because all the requisi te
plyometric elements may not be present. As with upper body
plyometric exercises, after the eccentric phase of the SSC there is
likely some storage of elastic energy during a plyometric (so to
speak) trunk dri ll.
TABLE 19.4  Trunk Plyometric Drills
Type Description
Lower body
anchor edEither suspended in a pr one posi tion or in a tr aditional si t-up posi tion wi th
the feet anchor ed so that the upper body is f ree to mo ve. Mo vements can
be progressed b y incorpor ating or incr easing an external r esistance or
movement v elocity.
1273
Type Description
Upper body
anchor edLying supine, holding a fix ed object or a partner ’s legs, whi le the lower body
is free to mo ve. Mo vements can be pr ogressed b y incorpor ating or
increasing external r esistance, mo vement v elocity, or plane of motion (e.g. ,
increased tr ansverse plane in volvement is mor e complex than sagi ttal plane
only).
Throws Forcefully projecting a medicine bal l or other external weight in a speci fied
direction. The mass of the implement wi ll influence the r esultant mo vement
velocity and should be consider ed in r espect to the mass– velocity–
momentum equation and the f orce production capabi lity of the athlete.
Exercises for the trunk may be performed ballistical ly provided
that movement modifications are made. Specifically, the exercise
movement must be shorter and quicker to allow stimulation and use
of the stretch reflex. The relatively large range of motion and the
time needed to complete the movement do not permi t reflexiv e
potentiation of the abdominal muscles. The exercises can be
modified to decrease both the range of motion and time, thereby
allowing the agonist muscles to be potentiated.
Intensity
Plyometric intensi ty refers to the stress placed on muscles,
connectiv e tissues, and joints during an exercise. It is primari ly
determined by the type of drill performed, technique used, and
arrangement of equipment. Additional ly, it is important to consider
the complexi ty of the movement when assessing intensi ty. For
example, multiple hurdle hops in a straight line can involve higher
linear speeds at a relatively lower intensi ty. Howev er, if the same
hurdles are arranged in a squar e that requires the athlete to change
direction with each hop, the intensi ty will be significantly higher . This
increase in intensi ty occurs because athletes must deceler ate their
momentum before each direction change. They must then use the
plyometric response to propel themselv es in a new direction. As a
result, both the intensi ty of the drill and the ground conta ct time can
increase substantial ly when dir ectional changes ar e incorpor ated.
1274
The intensi ty of plyometric drills is, therefore, multifactorial and
should be consider ed on a continuum from low to high intensi ty
depending on a number of planning factors. For example, skips are
consider ed a relatively low-intensi ty drill, while depth jumps  are
consider ed a higher intensi ty drill because they place a higher stress
on the muscles and joints ( figure 19.2 ).
FIGURE 19.2  Continuum of ply ometric ex ercises.
In addition to the type of drill, several other factors also affect
plyometric intensi ty (table 19.5). Generally, as intensi ty increases,
volume should decrease (57). Because the intensi ty of plyometric
exercise can vary significantly , careful consider ation must be given to
choosing pr oper dri lls during a speci fic training cy cle.
TABLE 19.5  Factors Affecting the Prescribed
Intensity of Lower Body Plyometric Drills
Factor Effect
Points of
contactThe gr ound r eaction f orce during single-leg lower body ply ometric dri lls
places mor e stress on an extr emity’s muscles, connectiv e tissues, and
joints than during double-leg ply ometric dri lls.
Speed Greater horiz ontal v elocity incr eases the intensi ty of the dri ll.
Technique Ankle, knee, and hip sti ffness and the abi lity to maintain postur al
alignment influence gr ound contact time, gr ound r eactional f orces,
eccentric muscle actions, and injury risk.
Strength Higher lev els of str ength–to–body weight r educe the r elative intensi ty of
a drill wher e mass is ac celerated tow ard the gr ound b y gravity (i.e. , any
1275
Factor Effect
form of r eactiv e plyometric dri ll).
Directional
changeChanging dir ection r equires deceler ation and r edirected ac celeration of
the athlete’ s center of mass. This incr eases the impulse r equired in the
action and t ypical ly requires incr eased gr ound contact time.
Vertical
component of
the dri llThe higher the body ’s center of gr avity, the gr eater the f orce on landing.
Mass The gr eater the athlete’ s body weight, the mor e stress is placed on
muscles, connectiv e tissues, and joints. External load in the f orm of
bars, weight v ests, ankle weights, and wrist weights can be added to
the body to incr ease a dri ll’s intensi ty.
Much like exercise selection for resistance training, specific
consider ation should be given to the muscle actions that are
incorpor ated into each plyometric exercise because this will alter the
muscle activation and resulting intensi ty. Reactiv e exercises require
athletes to reduce forces in a landing impact prior to propelling
themselv es in the desired direction, while ballistic exercises may not
(37). For example, a single countermo vement jump does not require
an athlete to absorb the same force as a depth jump. This realization
is important, because research indicates that muscle activation,
power , and relative impulse  are all higher in rebound exercises
compar ed to ballistic exercises, which demonstr ates an increased
level of intensi ty (37).
When consider ing exercise intensi ty, it is important to take note of
the exercise intensi ty overall as well as at the joint level. Resear ch
has shown that intensi ty is joint specific when considerin g the hips,
knees, and ankles of several exercises (61). For example, the
intensi ty of a backw ard jump is higher at the hips and ankles than it
is at the knees. Exercise modifications based on the joint
consider ations of an athlete are not uncommon, and considering the
intensi ty applied at each joint that is involved in an exercise will
likely result in mor e effective programming and adaptation.
1276
Frequency
Frequency refers to the number of plyometric training sessions per
week, typical ly ranging from one to four. This frequency depends on
the athletes’ sport, their experience with plyometric training, their
overall training status, the volume and intensi ty of plyometrics within
the broader resistance training program, and the time of year (e.g.,
off-season or in-season). For example, during the season, one
session per week is appropriate for American footbal l players, while
two or three sessions per week are common for track and field
athletes (2). During the off-season, plyometric training frequency
may increase to two or three sessions per week for American
footbal l players and to three or four sessions per week for track and
field athletes (2).
As with other program variables, resear ch on the optimal
frequency for plyometric training is limited. Because the literature is
sparse, strength and condi tioning professionals often rely on
practical experience when determining the frequency with which
athletes train using plyometric exercise. Rather than concentrating
on the frequency , many authors suggest relying more on the
recovery time between plyometric training sessions (19). Forty-eight
to 72 hours between plyometric sessions is a typical recovery time
guidel ine for prescribing plyometrics (19); using these typical
recovery times, athletes commonly perform two to three plyometric
sessions per week. As with resistance training, recovery between
workouts must be adequate to prevent overtraining (depending on
the sport, training status, and training intensi ty). Furthermor e,
moder ate to high volumes for a given body area should not be
performed on suc cessiv e days (51).
Recovery
Because plyometric drills involve maximal efforts to improve power ,
they are typical ly fatigue inducing and require complete and
adequate recovery (i.e., sufficient time between repetitions, sets,
and workouts) (51). Recovery for depth jumps may consist of 5 to
1277
10 seconds of rest between repetitions and 2 to 5 minutes between
sets. The time between sets is determined by a proper work-to-rest
ratio (i.e., 1:5 to 1:10) and is specific to the volume and type of drill
being performed. Drills should not be thought of as aerobic
endur ance training but as power training. Plyometric training can
induce fatigue  and inflammatory responses that can significantly
increase delayed onset of muscular soreness and may impair
jumping performance for up to 72 hours after a session. While these
effects are noticeable in power -related measur ements, strength
levels may remain unchanged (5, 18, 60). Given this prolonged
recovery period, strength and condi tioning professionals should
carefully schedule plyometric sessions to allow adequat e recovery
time between workouts and before competi tions. This approach
helps ensur e optimal performance and reduces the risk of
overtraining or injury .
Volume
Plyometric volume is typical ly expressed as the number of repetitions
and sets performed during a given training session (table 19.6).
Lower body plyometric volume is normal ly given as the number of
foot contacts  (each time a foot, or the feet together , contact the
surface) per workout (2, 19) but may also be expressed as distance,
as with plyometric bounding. For example, an athlete beginning a
plyometric training program may start with a bound for 30 yards (or
meters) per repetition but may progress to 100 yards (or meters)
per repetition for the same drill. Recommended lower body
plyometric volumes vary for athletes of different levels of experience
and also with the intensi ty level of the prescribed exercise. Upper
body plyometric volume is typical ly expressed as the number of
throws or catches per workout, and the ballistic nature of these
actions typical ly makes the training volumes reflect those of upper
body r esistance ex ercises (i.e. , 3-5 sets of 3-5 r epetitions).
TABLE 19.6   Plyometric Volumes
1278
Plyometric experience levelIntensity level of the plyometric drill
Low Moderate High
Beginner (no experience) 80 to 100 Nr to 40 Nr
Intermediate (some experience) 100 to 120 20 to 100 Nr to 20
Advanced (consider able experience) 120 to 200 20 to 120 20 to 40
Note:  Volume is giv en in contacts per session. Nr = not r ecommended.
Progression
Plyometrics is a form of resistance training and thus must follow the
principles of progressive overload , which  is the systematic
increase in training frequency , volume, and intensi ty in various
combinations. In simplistic models, as intensi ty increases, volume
decreases. This relationship , howev er, is variable depending on the
athlete’ s training status and the nature of the activity prescribed. For
example, athlete A who has minimal plyometric experie nce and a
low training status may do 3 sets of 10 repetitions of the pogo jump
to specifically train the SSC in the gastrocnemius–soleus complex,
but athlete B, who has a higher training age, may do the same drill
with an emphasis on minimizing ground contact time, and elite
athlete C may do the drill at the end of a warm-up to simply
potentiate the neuromuscular system. Further , after the pogo jump,
athlete A may do jumps over short hurdles, but athlete B may do the
depth jump instead and perform 2 sets of 4 repetitions with a 24-
inch (61 cm) box. Elite athlet e C may also do the depth jump but at
a higher volume and intensi ty, such as 4 sets of 8 repetitions using a
45-inch (114 cm) bo x.
Other factors such as the athlete’ s sport, sport season, and
training phase can influence the plyometric training schedule, design
of a plyometric training session, and the method of progressive
overload. An off-season plyometric program for America n footbal l,
for example, may be performed twice a week, but freshmen versus
senior players will do different plyometric activities. Additional ly, the
plyometric programs performed by skill (position) players versus
1279
offensive or defensive line players may be different. Thus, careful
consider ation should be given to each athlete’ s capaci ty and training
status when progressing a plyometric program, because volume and
intensi ty are not alw ays dir ectly r elated.
Effective plyometric programs include the same
variables that are essential to any training program
design: mode, intensity, frequency, recovery, volume,
and progression.
1280
Program Length
Resear ch has yet to determine an optimal plyometric training
program length . Currently, most programs range from 6 to 10 weeks
(2, 34); howev er, vertical jump height improves as quickly as four
weeks after the start of a plyometric training program (54). In
gener al, plyometric training should be prescribed similarly to
resistance training within a periodiz ed plan. For those sports
requiring quick, powerf ul movements, it is beneficial to perform
plyometric exercises throughout the training cycle. The intensi ty and
volume of the selected drills should vary with the training status of
the athlete and the sport season.
1281
Warm-Up
As in any training program, a plyometric exercise session should
begin with a specific warm-up that incorpor ates activation,
mobilization, and potentiation of the neuromuscular and
musculosk eletal system (refer to chapter 15 for movement
preparation guidelines). The specific warm-up for plyometric training
should consist of low-intensi ty, dynamic movements that increase in
intensi ty as the warm-up progresses. Table 19.7 provides a list and
explanation of examples of specific warm-up drills for plyometric
training.
Steps for Implementing a Plyometric
Training Program
1. Evaluate the athlete, including the athlete’ s sport and tr aining history .
2. Establ ish sport -, posi tion-, and athlete-speci fic goals.
3. Teach the athlete pr oper jumping, landing, and thr owing technique.
4. Assign pr oper ply ometric tr aining pr ogram design v ariables, addr essing
intensi ty, frequency , recovery, and v olume.
5. Properly pr ogress the ply ometric tr aining pr ogram.
1282
Age Considerations
It is becoming  more common for younger and older individuals to
want to augment the training programs for their sport with
plyometric exercise. When these exercises are applied appropriately ,
these populations can experience the same positive outcomes as
other age groups, with minimal risk of injury , with appropriate
consider ation of prescription to technical competence and strength
levels.
Adolescents
Although plyometrics commonly have been viewed as appropriate
only for condi tioning elite adult athletes, prepubescent and
adolescent children may also benefi t from training with plyometric
and plyometric -like exercises. Besides providing the well-
documented muscular power and bone strength adaptations, regular
participation in an appropriately designed plyometric training
program can better prepare young athletes for the demands of sport
practice and competi tion (20) by enhancing neuromuscu lar control
and performan ce. Resear ch has yet to determine a universal age at
which people are physical ly able to begin participa ting in a
plyometric training program. An analysis of the body’s development
provides some insight into the issue. Because the epiph yseal plates
of the bones of prepubescent children have yet to close (39, 47),
depth jumps and other high-intensi ty lower body drills are
contraindicated (2, 36, 46). Further , and as with all forms of
exercise, boys and girls should have the emotional maturi ty to
accept and follow directions and should be able to appreciate the
benefi ts and concerns associated with this method of training.
Empirical ly, 7- and 8-year-olds have been trained in progressive
plyometric programs and without detriment to future sport
involvement (20).
TABLE 19.7  Examples of Plyometric Warm-Up Drills
1283
Drill type Explanation
Marching Mimics running mo vements
Emphasiz es postur e and mo vement technique
Reinforces pr oper lower body mo vements f or running
Ground contact Prepares the body f or impact and high-intensi ty drills:
Rapid pogo jump—not al lowing the heel to touch the gr ound
(emphasiz es ankle dorsi flexion wi th activ e front foot gr ound
contact)
Straight-leg skip or bound—emphasiz es negative foot speed
(the r apid backw ard acceleration of the f oot) into the gr ound,
minimiz es knee flexion, and maximiz es hip extension to pr epare
for the impact of ply ometric dri lls
Exagger ated f orm of r eciprocal upper and lower extr emity
movements
Emphasiz es quick tak eoff and landing
Mimics ply ometric activi ties
Footwork Targets mul tiplanar ac celeration and deceler ation mechanics
Prepares for changes of dir ection during ply ometric dri lls
Examples: shut tle, shuf fle, pat tern, and stride dri lls
Neuromuscular
acceleration and
deceler ationMultijoint explosiv e directional changes wi th full-range
movements:
Forward, side, and backw ard lunge (simi lar to the f orward
[step] lunge ex ercise but mul tidirectional)
Squat pat terns (e.g. , a tal l reach into a deep snap-down then a
squat jump to a standing landing)
Note:  These examples are specific preparatory drills that can be incorpor ated into the
RAMP phases of a w arm-up f or ply ometrics; see chapter 15  for mor e detai l.
Plyometric exercise programs for children should be used to
develop the neuromuscular control and the anaer obic skills that will
carry over to safer participation in sport and athletics, both during
childhood and as they advance to higher levels of competi tion. For
example, several resear ch studies cite the benefi ts of using proper
landing techniq ue as a method of reducing an athlete’ s risk of lower
extremity injury (see the Safety Consider ations section starting on
page 576  for detai ls).
1284
It is extremely important that plyometric exercise programs for
children gradual ly progress from relatively simple drills to more
complex drills. It is important to focus on the quality of the
movements (e.g., proper body alignment and speed of movement)
to develop techniques that will be essential for more advanced
exercises. The current evidence suggests that a twice-weekly
program for 8 to 10 weeks beginning at 50 to 60 jumps a session
and increasing  exercise load weekly results in the largest changes in
running and jumping performance in young children (38). An
alternativ e program for children who do not have the capabi lity or
tolerance for a twice- weekly program would be a low-intensi ty
program for a longer dur ation (38).
Under proper supervision and with an appropriate
program, prepubescent and adolescent children  may
perform plyometric exerc ises. Depth jumps and high-
intensity lower body plyometrics are contraindicated for
this population.
Masters
Masters athletes find that they can maintain their physical
capabi lities late into life and are looking for additional training
insights. When designing a plyometric training program for a
masters athlete, the strength and condi tioning professional needs to
be specific in deciding on the goal of the program. Some primary
issues to consider are strength levels (i.e., ensuring that age-related
sarcopenia has not degraded muscle function) and any preexisting
orthopedic conditions (e.g., osteoarthri tis or any sort of surgical joint
interv ention) or joint degener ation. These call for even greater
caution and a more careful use of plyometric exercise. For example,
a healthy masters athlete without surgical history who wants to
improve his or her running performance should use depth jumps and
single-leg exercises cautiously , so alternate-leg boundin g and the
double-leg hopping would be better choices. Similarly, a masters
1285
runner with a history of knee surgery such as partial meniscus
removal or with significant joint degener ation should regard depth
jumps and single-leg plyometric exercises as contraindicated and use
other f orms of ply ometrics cautiously .
After consider ation of the predisposi tions related to the masters
athlete’ s physical condi tion, a plyometric program should be
designed according to the same guidel ines as outlined for adult
athletes, wi th the f ollowing emphases:
Intensi ty and volume should be carefully consider ed relative to
the perf ormance capaci ties of the individual.
Cautions regarding decreased strength capaci ties, potential for
degener ative joint condi tions, and decreased recovery
capaci ties associated wi th aging should be appl ied.
It is important to note how the masters athlete feels after
training; soreness may occur, but the program should be
modified if chronic or ex cessiv e pain or discomf ort is pr esent.
1286
Plyometrics and Other Forms of
Exercise
Plyometric exercise is only one part of an athlete’ s overall training
program. Many sports and activities use multiple energy systems or
require other forms of exercise to properly prepare athletes for
competi tion. Each energy system and sport-speci fic need must be
included in a wel l-designed tr aining pr ogram.
Plyometric Exercise and Resistance
Training
A combination of plyometrics and resistance training during a
training cycle should be structur ed to allow maximal efficiency and
physical improvement. The following list and table 19.8 provide
guidel ines f or dev eloping a combined pr ogram:
Combine lower body resistance training with upper body
plyometrics, and upper body resistance training with lower
body ply ometrics.
Performing heavy resistance training sessions and plyometric
sessions on the same day is not usually recommended (17,
24). Howev er, many athlet es may benefi t from complex
training , a combination of resistance training and plyometric
training within the same training session to enhance fast and
slow f orce expr ession.
If athletes perform this type of training, adequate recovery is
needed between ply ometrics and other high-intensi ty training.
Plyometrics can comprise a stand- alone training session or be
incorpor ated into a resistance training session. Incorpor ating
plyometrics into a resistan ce training session may have
neuromuscular recruitment benefi ts through facilitating
postactiv ation potentiation during biomechanical ly similar
movements (22).
1287
TABLE 19.8  Sample Schedule for Integrating
Resistance Training and Plyometrics
DayResistance
training sessionPlyometric
session Single session complex*
Monda yLow-intensi ty (light)
upper bodyHigh-intensi ty
(reactiv e) lower
bodyHigh-intensi ty (hea vy) lower body
resistance tr aining + Lower body
plyometrics
Tuesda yHigh-intensi ty
(heavy) lower bodyLow-intensi ty upper
bodyLow-intensi ty (light) upper body
resistance tr aining + Upper body
plyometrics
Thursda yHigh-intensi ty
(heavy) upper bodyLow-intensi ty
(ballistic) lower
bodyHigh-intensi ty (hea vy) upper body
resistance tr aining + Upper body
plyometrics
Friday Low-intensi ty (light)
lower bodyHigh-intensi ty upper
bodyLow-intensi ty (light) lower body
resistance tr aining + Lower body
plyometrics
*Emphasis on r esistance tr aining + ply ometrics wi thin a total body session.
The following are classifications and examples of complex training
based on Cormier and col leagues (22):
Contrast training  involves alternating high-load exercises
and high-velocity exercises in contrast pairs in a set-by-set
fashion with sufficient inter-set rest to avoid fatigue-ind uced
interference. An example is an American footbal l lineman
alternating sets of heavy bench presses with sets of clap push-
ups.
Ascending complex training  involves sets of a high-velocity
exercise followed by sets of a contrasting high-f orce exercise.
An example is a weightl ifter doing 2 sets of maximal-ef fort box
jumps bef ore perf orming mid-thigh power cleans.
Descending sets require multiple high-f orce exercises to be
completed before the execution of high-velocity exercises. An
example is a thrower doing 3 sets of 2 repetitions of heavy
back squats followed by 3 sets of 4 repetitions of overhead
medicine bal l throws.
1288
Plyometric Exercise and Aerobic Exercise
Many sports—such as basketball and soccer—have both an
anaer obic (i.e., power) and an aerobic component. Therefore,
multiple types of training must be combined to best prepare athletes
for these types of sports. Because aerobic exercise may have an
interfering effect on power production (17), it is advisable to perform
plyometric exercise before aerobic endur ance training. The program
design variable s do not change and should complement each other
to most ef fectively pr epare these athletes f or competi tion.
1289
Safety Considerations
Plyometric exercise is not inherently danger ous; howev er, as with all
modes of exercise, the risk of injury exists. Injuries can occur simply
due to an accident, but they more typical ly occur when proper
training procedures are violated and may be the result of an
insufficient strength and condi tioning base, inadequate warm-up ,
improper progression of lead-up drills, inappr opriate volume or
intensi ty for the phase of training, poor shoes or surface, or a simple
lack of skill. The following sections identi fy and address these and
other risk factors. Knowledge of risk factors can improve the safety
of athletes perf orming ply ometric ex ercise.
Pretraining Evaluation of the Athlete
To reduce the risk of injury and facilitate the performance of
plyometric exercises, the athlete must understand proper plyometric
technique and possess a sufficient base of strength, speed, and
balance. In addition, the athlete must be sufficiently matur e, both
physical ly and psychological ly, to participate in a plyometric training
program. The following evaluativ e items can help determine whether
an athlete meets these condi tions.
Technique
Before adding any drill to an athlete’ s plyometric program, the
strength and condi tioning professional must first demonstr ate proper
technique to the athlete and then coach and cue the athlete on
proper technique to maximiz e the drill’s effectiveness and minimiz e
the risk of injury . For lower body plyometrics, proper landing
technique is essential. If an athlete’ s center of gravity is offset from
the base of support, performance is hinder ed, and injury may occur.
The shoulders should be over the knees and the knees should be
over the toes during the landing, which the athlete accompl ishes
through ankle dorsiflexion and knee and hip flexion (figure 19.3). In
addition, when  viewing the frontal plane and motion of the athlete
1290
performing lower body plyometrics, it is essential that the knees are
positioned over the toes. Inward movement of the knees— also
termed dynamic valgus —is a significant risk factor for knee
injuries of all types, including patellofemoral pain and tears or
ruptur es of the anterior cruciate l igament (ACL) (45).
In addition to instructing an athlete on a proper body position
while landing, the strength and condi tioning professional must
explain, coach,  and cue the athlete to land with an active flat foot.
In preparation for ground contact, the athlete’ s ankles should be
dorsiflexed (so that the toes are pulled back toward the knees). This
means that the bottom of the foot is parallel to the ground as the
athlete comes into landing. Immediately before landing, the athlete
should be taught to aggressively plantarflex the ankle to “attack the
ground with the foot.” This achiev es two outcomes. First, the
plantarflexion increases the tension in the gastrocnem ius–soleus
complex at ground contact, which increases the efficacy of the SSC
and enhances the output power in the resulting jump. Second, the
last-second adjustment in the angle of the foot, along with the
increased muscle tension, means that the heels stay off the ground
during the land–tak eoff action. This enhances both anterior and
vertical propulsion and is often coached as “the credit card rule,”
meaning that enough of the foot should be in contact with the
ground to achiev e high impulses, but the strength and conditioning
professional should be able to slide a credit card under the athlete’ s
heels (12a).
Strength
Consider ation of the athlete’ s level of strength is necessary before he
or she performs plyometrics. Strength is essential for the
maintenance of postur e through the plyometric action and the ability
to manage and appropriately direct ground reaction forces through
effective ground contact to optimiz e performance benefits and
reduce potential for injury (figure 19.4). Without these outcomes,
safe and effective techniques  cannot be maintained as the intensi ty
1291
of plyometric exercise is increased. Previous recommendations for
lower body plyometrics stated that the athlete’ s 1RM squat should
be at least 1.5 times his or her body weight (17, 24, 36, 50, 63).
Howev er, many plyometric activities can be safely taught to athletes
without such formal ized levels of strength (figure 19.5). It is our
recommendation that plyometrics be included for all athletes whose
sports require running, landing, jumping, or cutting. As a
prerequisi te, teaching proper alignment and movement mechanics
through the use of plyometr ic exercise has been shown repeatedly
to decrease the athlete’ s risk of injury during practices and games
(50). Various authors have theoriz ed that basic in-place jumps such
as repeated pogo jumps and countermo vement jumps require
relatively low levels of strength; repeated hops and jumps may
require a basic strength level equiv alent to a back squat of 1 × body
weight, bounding and depth jumps using a box 12 inches (30 cm)
tall or shorter may have a back squat strength equiv alent of 1.5 ×
body weight, and depth or box jumps with a box higher than 12
inches (30 cm) may require a back squat strength equiv alent of 2 ×
body weight (58).
1292
FIGURE 19.3 Proper plyometric  landing technique. (a) When learning to land and stop,
the shoulders are in line with the knees, which helps place the center of gravity over the
body’s base of support. The knees are over the toes; excessiv e inward (valgus) movement
increases the risk of lower extremity injury; weight is evenly distributed through a flat foot
to allow a balanced deceler ation position. Learning to land and stop, decelerating body
mass completely , is a precursor to learning to land and rebound (i.e., reaccelerate body
mass). (b) Proper landing technique to facilitate reactionary rebound actions; the shoulders
are in line with the knees, the ankles are stiff, and athlete contacts the ground with the
midfoot and forefoot to enable a rebound acceleration to occur. Note the alignment of the
hips, knees and toes, with the feet hip-width apart to optimiz e vertical or horizontal force
(depending on the subsequent mo vement).
Back squat equivalent strength  is a descriptiv e term used to
infer the neces sary strength capaci ty required to tolerate the impact
stress of the exercise so that it does not acutely overreach the
athlete and become injurious. The back squat is illustrative due to
the nature of its axial load on the total body, yet it is recogniz ed that
not every athlete measur es maximal squat strength. It is important
to note that it is not simply the magni tude of strength that is
important but the athletic quality to be able to apply  the force
required within the given ground contact time. Therefore, a focus on
rate of force developmen t as well as magni tude of force
development is an important consider ation within plyometric
prescription.
1293
Balance
Balance is a lower body plyometric prerequisi te that should not be
overlook ed. Balance  is the maintenance of a position without
movement for a given period of time. Many lower body plyometric
drills require the athlete to move in nontraditional patterns or on a
single leg. These types of drills necessi tate a solid, stable base of
support on which the athlete can safely and correctly perform the
exercises. Three balance tests are provided in table 19.9, listed in
order of difficulty; each test position must be held for 30 seconds
(62). For example, an athlete beginning plyometric training for the
first time would be required to stand on one leg for 30 seconds
without falling. An experie nced athlete beginning an advanced
plyometric training program must maintain a single-leg half squat for
30 seconds without falling. Additional ly, the surface on which the
balance testing  is performed should be the same as that used in the
plyometric dri lls.
1294
FIGURE 19.4 Char acteristics and progressions of plyometric exercise to emphasiz e
eccentric loading for athletes of varying  strength levels. ECC = eccentric; CON = concentric;
BW = body weight;  + = low emphasis; ++ = moder ate emphasis; +++ = high emphasis;
L = low height; M = moder ate height; H = high height; VH = very high height; CMJ =
countermo vement jump; SJ = static jump).
*overall priori ty is on corr ect ski ll execution and landing mechanics
**not appl icable to ex ercises r equiring landing only (ECC+++ column)
Reprinted by permission from T.J. Suchomel, J.P. Wagle, J. Douglas, et al., “Implementing Eccentric Resistance
Training-Part 2: Practical Recommendations,” Journal of Functional Morphology and Kinesiology 4, no. 3 (2019): 55.
Distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://creativecommons
.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
1295
FIGURE 19.5 Theor etical relationship between strength and the optimization of
plyometric ex ercise perf ormance.
Reprinted by permission from T.J. Suchomel, J.P. Wagle, J. Douglas, et al., “Implementing Eccentric Resistance
Training-Part 2: Practical Recommendations,” Journal of Functional Morphology and Kinesiology 4, no. 3 (2019): 55.
Distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://creativecommons
.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
TABLE 19.9  Balance Tests
Test* Variations
Standing Double leg
Single leg
Quarter squat Double leg
Single leg
Half squat Double leg
Single leg
*A suc cessful test oc curs when the posi tion can be held f or 30 seconds wi thout f alling.
Physical Characteristics
Athletes who weigh more than 220 pounds (100 kg) may be at an
increased risk for injury when performing plyometric exercises (50,
1296
63). Greater weight (mass) increases the compr essive force on joints
during the exercises, thereby predisposing ankle, knee, and hip–
pelvic complex joints to injury . Therefore, athletes weighin g over 220
pounds (100 kg) should approach high-volume and high-intensi ty
plyometric exercises and depth jumps from heights greater than 18
inches (46 cm) with cautio n (50, 63). As with other forms of
exercise, an athlete’ s joint structur e and previous injuries  must also
be exam ined before he or she begins a plyometric training program.
Previous injuries or abnormal ities of the spine, lower extremities, or
upper extremities may increase an athlete’ s risk of injury during
plyometric exercise. Specifically, athletes with a history of muscle
strains, patho logical joint laxity, or spinal dysfunction —including
vertebr al disk dysfunction or compr ession—should use caution when
beginning a plyometric training program (28, 29, 36, 55). Ultimately ,
because the body composi tion, strength, and technical competency
can differ between athletes who weigh the same, professional
judgment always should be applied when considering plyometric
prescription.
Equipment and Facilities
In addition to athletes’ fitness and health, the area and equipment
used f or ply ometric dri lls ma y signi ficantly af fect their saf ety.
Landing Surface
To prevent injuries, the landing surface used for lower body
plyometrics must possess adequate shock -absorbing properties. A
grass field, suspended floor, or rubber mat is a good surface choice
(36). Surfaces such as concr ete, tile, and hardwood  are not
recommended because they lack effective shock -absorbing
properties (36). Excessiv ely thick exercise mats (6 inches [15 cm] or
thicker) may extend the amortization phase and thus not allow
efficient use of the stretch reflex. Mini-tr ampol ines are commonly
used for beginning plyometric and balance training in rehabi litation
(32). While these devices may provide a necessary introduction to
1297
plyometrics, especial ly for those recovering from musculoskeletal
injury , mini-tr ampol ines, like thick exercise mats, are not effective for
plyometric training of uninjur ed athletes because the amortization
phase is extended while the athlete is in contact with the elastic
surface.
Training Area
The amount of space neede d depends on the drill. Most bounding
and running drills require at least 30 yards (or meters) of
straighta way, though some drills may require a straighta way of 100
yards (or meters). For most standing, box, and depth jumps, only a
minimal surface area is needed, but the ceiling height must be at
least 10 f eet (3 m) to be adequate.
Equipment
Boxes used for box jumps and depth jumps must be sturdy and
should have a nonslip top. Boxes should range in height from 6 to 42
inches (15-107 cm) and should have landing surfaces of at least 18
by 24 inches (46 × 61 cm) (19). The box should be constructed of
sturdy wood (e.g., 3/4-inch [1.9 cm] plywood) or heavy-gauge metal
that is covered in a protectiv e covering to reduce the risk of injury if
the athlete contacts the box. High density foam within a cubed
framework with solid landing surfaces is also appropriate.  To further
reduce injury risk, there are several ways of making the landing
surface nonslip such as adding nonslip treads, mixing sand into the
paint used to cover the box, or affixing rubberiz ed flooring  to the top
(19).
Proper Footwear
Athletes must use footwear with good ankle and foot support; good
lateral stability; and a wide, nonslip sole (50). Ankle injury risk may
be increased in shoes with a narrow sole and poor mid-foot support,
especial ly with lateral movements. Shoes with insufficient foot
support may lead to arch or lower leg injuries or both, while
footwear without enough cushioning might lead to knee and hip
1298
joint damage. Shoes with excessiv e cushioning may also interfere
with the amortization phase process, and a shoe that has increased
inbuilt pronatio n (such as a weightl ifting shoe) may interfere with
ground contact mechanics and therefore the safety and effectiveness
of the ex ercise.
Supervision
In addition to the safety consider ations already outlined, close
monitoring of athletes is necessary to ensur e proper technique.
Plyometric exercise is not intrinsical ly danger ous when performed
correctly, but as with other forms of training, poor technique may
unnecessari ly predispose an athlete to injury .
Depth Jumping
There is a limit to the maxim al height at which a depth jump can be
effectively and safely performed. A height of 48 inches (122 cm)
would provide a significant overload on the muscles, but the
resistance may be too great for many athletes to overcome while
maintaining correct technique (47). Jumping from such a height
increases the possibi lity of injury; furthermor e, the amou nt of force
to be overcome is so great that the amortization phase is extended
and thus the purpose of the exercise is defeated. The recommended
height for depth jumps ranges from 16 to 42 inches (41-107 cm),
with 30 to 32 inches (76-81c m) being the norm (4, 21, 30, 43, 44,
48). The depth jump box height for athletes who weigh  over 220
pounds (100 kg) should be 18 inches (46 cm) or less.
1299
Conclusion
The major goal of plyometric training is to rapidly apply force to
provide an overload to the agonist muscles. Although it has been
repeatedly shown that plyometric exercise increases muscular power
for athletes in a formal training program (34, 53, 65, 67), resear ch
has yet to determine whether mechanical or neurophysiological
adaptations account for the improvement. Plyometrics should be
consider ed not an end in itself but part of an appropriately
periodiz ed program that includes strength, speed, endurance, and
mobility training. Plyometrics requires an appropriate warm-up and
should be preplanned to allow adequate recovery. After the athlete
has begun a proper strength and condi tioning program, plyometric
training may be used to further develop impulses and positive
transfer of tr aining benefi ts.
PLYOMETRIC DRILLS
Lower Body Plyometric Drills
JUMPS IN PLACE
  1  Pogo Jump   582
  2  Ankle Hop   582
  3  Squat Jump   583
  4  Jump and R each   584
  5  Tuck Jump   585
  6  Split Squat Jump   586
  7  Cycled Spl it Squat Jump   587
  8  Tuck Hop   588
  9  Pike Jump   589
STANDING JUMPS
1300
10  Vertical Jump   590
11  Vertical Hop   591
12  Jump Ov er Barrier   591
13  Standing Long Jump   592
MULTIPLE HOPS AND JUMPS
14  Multiple Horiz ontal Low Hur dle Jump   593
15  Double-Leg Zigzag Jump   594
16  Linear Hop   595
17  Multiple B arrier Hop   596
18  Lateral Barrier Jump   597
19  Four-Hurdle Hop   598
20  Progressive Later al Jump   599
BOUNDS
21  Skip  600
22  Power Skip   601
23  Lateral Skip   602
24  Linear B ound   603
25  Double- Arm Linear B ound   604
BOX DRILLS
26  Drop Step to Later al Bound and R eturn   605
27  Single-Leg Push-Of f  606
28  Alternating-Leg Push-Of f  607
29  Lateral Push-Of f  608
30  Rear Foot–Elevated Mul tidirectional Hop   609
31  Side-to- Side Push-Of f  610
32  Box Jump   611
33  Box Hop   612
34  Lateral Box Jump   613
1301
35  Drop Freeze  614
DEPTH JUMPS
36  Depth Jump   615
37  Depth Jump to B ox Jump   616
38  Depth Jump I nto Dir ectional Sprint   617
39  Depth Jump to Long Jump   618
40  Depth Jump to 180-Degr ee Turn  619
41  Depth Hop   620
Upper Body Plyometric Drills
THROWS
  42  Chest P ass  621
  43  Two-Hand Ov erhead Thr ow  622
  44  Rotational Thr ow  623
  45  Single- Arm Thr ow  624
  46  Power Dr op  625
  47  Half-Kneel ing Ov erhead Medicine B all Throw for Distance  
626
  48  Single- Arm R everse Thr ow  626
  49  Viking Thr ow for Height   628
  50  Medicine B all Slam f rom Single-Leg B alance   629
PLYOMETRIC PUSH-UPS
  51  Depth Push-Up   630
  52  Lateral Travel Push-Up   631
TRUNK PLYOMETRICS
  53  45-Degr ee Sit-Up  632
  54  Seated R otational Medicine B all Throw  633
  55  Leg Pushdown   634
1302
LOWER BODY PLYOMETRIC DRILLS
Jumps in Place
  1  POGO JUMP
Intensi ty level: Low
Direction:  Vertical
Starting position: Get into a comfortable, upright stance with feet
hip-width apart.
Arm action:  None or double arm
Preparatory mo vement:  Begin wi th a sl ight countermo vement.
Upward movement:  Jump up , with primary motion at the ankle joint.
Down ward movement:  Land with an active flat foot contact in the
starting posi tion, wi th hips and knees sti ff, and immediately r epeat.
Note:  This drill should be performed with little horizontal (forward or
backw ard) or later al mo vement.
COMMON ERRORS
Flexing the hips and knees on landing to increase vertical
force, which increases ground contact time and changes
the nature of the ankle-dominant exercise
Not dorsiflexing the ankle in flight; this makes athletes
land on their toes, which changes the nature of the
ground contact
1303
  2  ANKLE HOP
Intensi ty level: Medium
Direction:  Vertical
Starting position: Get into a comfortable, upright stance on one foot.
The non-hopping leg is held in a stationary position with the knee
flexed during the ex ercise.
Arm action:  None or double arm
Preparatory mo vement:  Begin wi th a sl ight countermo vement.
Upward movement:  Using the balancing foot, hop upward, with
primary motion at the ankle joint.
Down ward movement:  Have the ankle dorsiflexed in flight to prepare
for an active flat foot contact. (Note:  The second photo does not yet
show the left foot in the needed position for landing. ) Land in the
1304
starting position with the hips and knees stiff, and immediately
repeat. R epeat wi th the opposi te leg after a brief r est.
Note:  This drill should be performed with little horizontal (forward or
backw ard) or later al mo vement.
COMMON ERRORS
Flexing the hips and knees on landing to increase vertical
force; this increases ground contact time and changes
the nature of the ankle-dominant exercise
Landing off-balance so that rebound hops become
multidirectional rather than vertical
  3  SQUAT JUMP
1305
Intensi ty level: Low
Direction:  Vertical
Starting position: Get into a squat position (thighs slightly above
parallel with the ground) with feet hip- to shoulder -width apart.
Interlock the fingers and place the hands behind the head.
Arm action:  None
Preparatory mo vement:  None
Upward movement:  Explosiv ely jump up to a maximum height.
Extend the body as tal l as possible.
Down ward movement:  Ankles should be dorsiflexed in flight and
ready for flat foot landing. (Note:  The second photo does not yet
show the feet in the needed position for landing. ) Land in the squat
position, and immediately r epeat the jump .
COMMON ERRORS
Landing and immediately jumping again before resetting
to achieve squat depth for the subsequent jump
Lack of hip and knee extension, meaning the body is not
fully extended in flight
1306
  4  JUMP AND REACH
Intensi ty level: Low
Direction:  Vertical
Starting position: Get into a comfortable, upright stance with feet
hip-width apart.
Arm action:  Double arm wi th reach at the top of the jump
Preparatory mo vement:  Begin wi th a countermo vement.
Upward movement:  Explosiv ely jump up and reach for an object or
target.
Down ward movement:  Ankles should be dorsiflexed in flight and
ready for an active flat-foot landing. Land in the starting position and
immediately r epeat the jump .
Note:  Emphasis is on vertical height with minimal delay between
jumps. Also, this drill should be performed with little horizontal
1307
(forward or backw ard) or later al mo vement.
COMMON ERRORS
Not coordinating arm action with the jump; everything
should move upward at the same time
Trunk not being vertical at takeoff, meaning that vertical
force generation is compromised and forward movement
will occur
  5  TUCK JUMP
Intensi ty level: Medium
Direction:  Vertical
1308
Starting position: Get into a comfortable, upright stance with feet
hip-width apart.
Arm action:  Double arm
Preparatory mo vement:  Begin wi th a countermo vement.
Upward movement:  Explosiv ely jump up. Pull the knees to the chest,
quickly grasp the knees with both hands, and release before landing.
Pull the ankles toward the knees in flight to prepare for an active
flat-foot landing.
Down ward movement:  Land in the starting position, and
immediately r epeat the jump .
COMMON ERRORS
Pulling the knees up rather than pushing into the ground
maximally then tucking knees
Failure to perform a countermovement on subsequent
repetitions; this decreases ground contact time but
reduces vertical force generation
1309
  6  SPLIT SQUAT JUMP
Intensi ty level: Low
Direction:  Vertical
Starting position: Get into a lunge position with one leg forward (hip
and knee joints flexed approximately 90 degrees) and the other
behind the midl ine of the body wi th the trunk v ertical.
Arm action:  Double arm or none
Preparatory mo vement:  Begin wi th a countermo vement.
Upward movement: Explosiv ely jump up, using the arms to assist as
needed. Maximum height and power should be emphasiz ed.
Down ward movement:  Dorsiflex the ankles in preparation for an
active flat-foot landing. (Note:  The second photo does not yet show
the feet positioned for landing. ) When landing, maintain  the lunge
position (with the same leg forward) and immediately repeat the
jump. After completing a set, r est and swi tch front legs.
1310
COMMON ERRORS
Lack of coordinated triple extension (hips, knees, and
ankle plantarflexion) in the takeoff, reducing the vertical
force production
Landing with the trunk leaning too far forward so the
appropriate split squat position is not achieved
  7  CYCLED SPLIT SQUAT JUMP
Intensi ty level: Medium
Direction:  Vertical
Starting position: Get into a lunge position with one leg forward (hip
and knee joints flexed approximately 90 degrees) and the other
behind the midl ine of the body .
Arm action:  Double arm or none
Preparatory mo vement:  Begin wi th a countermo vement.
Upward movement: Explosiv ely jump up, using the arms to assist as
needed. While off the ground, switch the position of the legs.
1311
Maximum height and power should be emphasiz ed.
Down ward movement:  Dorsiflex the ankle of the lead landing leg in
preparation for an active flat-foot landing. When landing, maintain
the lunge position (opposi te leg forward) and immediately repeat the
jump. Be sure not to absorb ground reaction force and sink too deep
into the lunge, because the SSC may not be able to effectively
contribute to subsequent jumps.
COMMON ERRORS
Overemphasizing a quick split rather than vertical drive
to create time for the leg switch to occur prior to landing
Landing with the trunk leaning too far forward so the
necessary split squat position is not achieved
  8  TUCK HOP
Intensi ty level: High
Direction:  Vertical
1312
Starting position: Get into a comfortable, upright stance on one foot.
The non-hopping leg is held in a stationary position with the knee
flexed during the ex ercise.
Arm action:  Double arm
Preparatory mo vement:  Begin wi th a countermo vement.
Upward movement:  Explosiv ely hop up. Pull the knee of the hopping
leg to the chest, grasp the knee with both hands, and release before
landing.
Down ward movement:  Dorsiflex the ankles in preparation for an
active flat-foot landing. Land in the starting position, and
immediately repeat the jump using the same leg. Complete a set,
then r epeat wi th the opposi te leg after a brief r est.
COMMON ERRORS
Lack of vertical height achieved before achieving the
tuck position
Poorly coordinated sequencing of the arm action relative
to the upward drive from the legs
1313
  9  PIKE JUMP
Intensi ty level: Medium
Direction:  Vertical
Starting position: Get into a comfortable, upright stance with feet
hip-width apart.
Arm action:  Double arm
Preparatory mo vement:  Begin wi th a countermo vement.
Upward movement:  Explosiv ely jump up. Keeping the legs straight
and together , try to lift them to the front and try to touch the toes
with the hands.
Down ward movement:  Land in the starting position, and
immediately r epeat the jump .
COMMON ERRORS
1314
Overemphasis on bringing the legs forward rather than
pushing into the ground to achieve vertical height
Poor landing position due to lack of recovery from the
pike
Standing Jumps
  10  VERTICAL JUMP
Intensi ty level: Low
Direction:  Vertical
Starting position: Get into a comfortable, upright stance with feet
hip-width apart.
Arm action:  Double arm
Preparatory mo vement:  Begin wi th a countermo vement.
Upward movement: Explosiv ely jump up, using both arms to assist,
and reach f or a tar get.
1315
Down ward movement:  Dorsiflex the ankles in preparation for an
active flat-foot landing. (Note:  The second photo does not yet show
the feet in the ideal position for landing, because the athlete is still
rising. ) Land in the starting  position, and immediately repeat the
action f or repetitions.
COMMON ERRORS
Poor sequencing of the forward and upward arm
(shoulder) flexion in sequence with lower limb triple
extension, which results in a coordination loss of upward
momentum
Inappropriately deep countermovement, which increases
the amortization phase and therefore the ground contact
time between jumps
1316
  11  VERTICAL HOP
Intensi ty level: Medium
Direction:  Vertical
Starting position: Get into a comfortable, upright stance on one foot.
The non-jumping leg is held in a stationary position with the knee
flexed.
Arm action:  Double arm
Preparatory movement:  Begin with a countermo vement on the
hopping leg. B ring the other leg behind the body .
Upward movement:  Explosiv ely hop up, driving the non-hopping leg
forward and up to assist momentum. Use both arms to assist, and
1317
reach f or a tar get.
Down ward movement:  Dorsiflex the ankle in preparation for an
active flat-foot landing. Land in the starting position, and
immediately repeat the action for repetitions. Repeat with the
opposi te leg after a brief r est.
COMMON ERRORS
Not using the non-hopping leg in a coordinated manner
to increase vertical momentum
Not sequencing the arm action with the upward
movement of the lower limb so vertical momentum is
lost
  12  JUMP OVER BARRIER
Intensi ty level: Medium
Direction:  Horizontal and v ertical
Equipment:  A barrier such as a cone or hur dle
Starting position: Get into a comfortable, upright stance with feet
hip-width apart.
Arm action:  Double arm
Preparatory mo vement:  Begin wi th a countermo vement.
Upward movement:  Take off with a full triple extension of hips,
knees, and ankles. (Note:  The second photo should show the athlete
in a tall position to demonstr ate full triple extension after takeoff. It
also does not yet show the feet in the correct position for landing. )
Jump over the barrier with both legs, maximizing the height of the
center of mass and using only sufficient hip and knee flexion to clear
the barrier. Keep the knees and feet together without lateral
deviation.
Down ward movement:  Dorsiflex the ankles in preparation for a
stable flat-foot landing. Land in the starting position and reset.
Repeat unti l the set is complete.
1318
Note:  The height of the barrier should be progressively increased
(e.g., from a cone to a hurdle to a higher hurdle) as the athlete
adapts to the intensi ty of the dri ll.
COMMON ERRORS
Hurdle height insufficient to challenge the athlete to
maximally push from the ground to achieve an extended
position above the hurdle
Inappropriate landing position whereby the athlete lands
in an unstable position
  13  STANDING LONG JUMP
Intensi ty level: Low
Direction:  Horizontal
Starting position: Get into a comfortable, upright stance with feet
hip-width apart.
Arm action:  Double arm
Preparatory mo vement:  Begin wi th a countermo vement.
1319
Upward movement:  Explosiv ely jump forward and up, using both
arms to assist, wi th a goal of achieving maximal horiz ontal distance.
Down ward movement:  Dorsiflex the ankles in preparation for an
active flat-foot landing. Land on both feet. Allow recovery time
between jumps.
Note:  This is typical ly a single ballistic effort, with several repetitions
in a set. Howev er, it can be done as multiple jumps in sequence.
Care should be taken so that the forward momentum of the athlete
does not cause overrotation in the sagittal plane. Coach the athlete
to jump up and out; otherwise the tendency is for too much
horizontal momentum f or the athlete to contr ol.
COMMON ERRORS
Inefficient takeoff angle, resulting in suboptimal flight
distance; the lean should be far enough forward to
optimize horizontal propulsion but not so far that the
center of mass is too anteriorly located to optimize
ground reaction forces
Lack of full extension in the legs and full flexion in the
shoulders at takeoff, which reduces the opportunity for
ground reaction impulse to be created
1320
Multiple Hops and Jumps
  14  MULTIPLE HORIZONTAL LOW
HURDLE JUMP
Intensi ty level: Medium
Direction:  Horizontal and v ertical
Starting position: Get into a comfortable upright stance with feet
hip-width apart.
Arm action:  Double arm
Preparatory mo vement:  Begin wi th a countermo vement.
Upward movement:  Jump as far forward as possible and over the
first barrier. Coach the athlete to jump “upward and outward” and
“get as tall as possible over the hurdle” rather than tuck jump to
clear and not extend the body f ully.
Down ward movement:  Dorsiflex the ankles in preparation for an
active flat-foot landing. Land in the starting position, and
1321
immediately repeat the jump, optimizing ground contact time to
control impulse pr oduction.
Note:  A low hurdle height should  encour age low flight time and
lower ground contact time. The exercise can be increased in
intensi ty with a higher hurdle height, but this will typical ly influence
the natur e of the gr ound contact.
COMMON ERRORS
Incorrect hurdle height or a less-than-maximal push
from the ground to achieve full extension position when
clearing the hurdle
Inappropriate landing mechanics that increase ground
contact time in between hurdles
1322
  15  DOUBLE-LEG ZIGZAG JUMP
Intensi ty level: Medium
Direction:  Diagonal
Equipment:  Place 8 to 12 hurdles 18 to 24 inches (46-61 cm) apart
in a zigzag pat tern.
Starting position: Get into a comfortable, upright stance with feet
hip-width apart. Stand on the outside of the first hurdle. Elbows
should be flex ed at 90 degr ees and held at the sides of the body .
Arm action:  Double arm
Preparatory mo vement:  Begin wi th a countermo vement.
1323
Upward movement: Jump from the outside of the first hurdle to the
outside of the second hurdle, keeping the hips and shoulders facing
the dir ection of tr avel.
Down ward movement:  In flight, dorsiflex the ankles in preparation
for an active flat-foot landing. Immediately on landing on the outside
of the second hurdle, change  direction and jump diagonal ly over the
second hurdle to the outside  of the third hurdle. Continu e jumping
over all the hur dles.
Note:  Hurdle height can significant ly alter the intensi ty and in-flight
body position of the athlete. The athlete should be as extended as
possible to clear the hurdle. (Note:  The second photo shows the
athlete clearing the hurdle too high relative to the hurdle height and
with excessiv e knee flexion. ) Correct execution will result in the hips
and knees being as stiff as possible on landing to optimiz e ground
contact. Intensi ty of the drill can be significantly increased by
performing hops wi th only one leg.
COMMON ERRORS
Not adjusting the body angle coming into a landing to
keep the center of mass going in the desired direction of
the next jump; this significantly increases ground
contact time
Not “attacking the ground” from a dorsiflexed ankle
position, which increases ground contact time
1324
  16  LINEAR HOP
Intensi ty level: Medium
Direction:  Horizontal and v ertical
Starting position: Get into a comfortable, upright stance on one foot.
The non-jumping leg is held in a stationary position with the hip and
knee flex ed during the ex ercise.
Arm action:  Double arm
Preparatory movement:  Begin with a countermo vement on the
hopping leg. B ring the other leg behind the body .
Upward movement:  Explosiv ely hop forward, driving from the hip,
knee, and ankle, using both arms and the opposi te knee to assist
the mo vement.
Down ward movement:  Dorsiflex the ankles in preparation for an
active flat-foot landing. (Note:  The second photo does not yet show
the feet in the needed position for landing. ) Land in the starting
position, use an active flat-foot contact to optimiz e the ground
contact time, and immediately repeat the hop for the desired
1325
number of repetitions. Repeat with the opposi te leg after a brief
rest.
COMMON ERRORS
Excessive flexion of the hip, knee, and ankle on landing,
which unnecessarily increases the amortization phase
and ground contact time
Hopping with the weight too far forward in the foot,
which reduces ground reaction forces and limits optimal
force production to maximize flight distance
  17  MULTIPLE BARRIER HOP
1326
Intensi ty level: Medium to high
Direction:  Horizontal and v ertical
Equipment:  Two to 10 barriers such as cones or hur dles
Starting position: Facing the first barrier , get into a comfortable,
single-leg upright stance with the contralater al hip and knee flexed
to 90 degr ees.
Arm action:  Double arm
Preparatory movement:  Begin with a countermo vement on the
hopping leg. B ring the other leg behind the body .
Upward movement:  Explosiv ely hop forward, driving from the hip,
knee, and ankle over the first barrier as tall as possible, using
necessary hip and knee flexion to clear the barrier .
Down ward movement:  Dorsiflex the ankles in preparation for an
active flat-foot landing in the starting position, and immediately
repeat the jump o ver the second barrier .
Note:  Intensi ty level of this exercise can be increased from medium
to high by progressively increasing the height of the barrier (e.g.,
from a cone to a hurdle). Increasing the intensi ty of the hop may
increase the gr ound contact time and the amortization phase.
COMMON ERRORS
Incorrect hurdle height or a less-than-maximal push
from the ground to achieve full extension position when
clearing the hurdle
Inappropriate landing mechanics, which increases
ground contact time between hurdles
1327
  18  LATERAL BARRIER JUMP
Intensi ty level: Medium
Direction:  Lateral and v ertical
Equipment:  A barrier such as a cone or hur dle
Starting position: With the barrier to one side, get into a
comfortable, upright stance wi th feet hip- width apart.
Arm action:  Double arm
Preparatory mo vement:  Begin wi th a countermo vement.
Upward movement:  Leaning out of the countermo vement in the
direction of travel, use a powerf ul triple extension to jump over the
barrier as tall as possible with both legs, using necessa ry hip and
knee flexion to clear the barrier. (Note:  The second photo shows the
1328
athlete clearing the hurdle too high relative to the hurdle height and
with too much knee flexion. ) Keep the hips and shoulder squar e and
the knees and f eet together wi thout later al deviation.
Down ward movement:  Rotate over the hurdle so the lean is in the
direction of the subsequent jump on landing. Dorsiflex the ankles in
preparation for an active flat-foot landing on the opposi te side of the
barrier , and immediately repeat the jump to the starting side. (Note:
The third photo does not show the athlete leaning back toward the
starting side f or the r eturn jump .)
Note:  The intensity level of the lateral barrier hop can be increased
from medium to high by progressively increasing the height of the
barrier or by performing movement with one leg only (i.e., a hop),
which is an excellent exercise for aiding direction change capaci ty in
the athlete. By reversing the direction of movement, the ground
contact time and the amortization phase of the movement are
changed comp ared to movements in the same direction. This will be
influenced f urther b y the height of the hur dle.
COMMON ERRORS
Not maintaining a square hip and shoulder position, so
the jump does not stay in the frontal plane
Lack of preparatory lean in both takeoff (center of mass
should lean in the direction of travel) and landing (orient
the body so that it is leaning back toward the start for
the return jump), which increases the ground contact
time and reduces the effectiveness of the drill
1329
  19  FOUR-HURDLE HOP
Intensi ty level: High
Direction:  Lateral and v ertical
Equipment:  Four hurdles: two pairs of hurdles. Each hurdle in the
pair is separ ated by 12 inches (30 cm). Each pair is separ ated by 18
inches (46 cm).
Starting position: Get into a comfortable, upright stance on the right
foot; the line of four hurdles will be to the left. The non-ju mping leg
is held in a stationary position with the hip and knee flexed during
the ex ercise.
Arm action:  Double arm
Preparatory mo vement:  Begin wi th a countermo vement.
Movements:
1330
1. Lean in the dir ection of tr avel.
2. Explosiv ely hop left over the first hurdle with the right foot,
using both arms to assist.
3. Dorsiflex the ankles in preparation for an active flat-foot
landing.
4. Land on the right foot, and immediately repeat the hop over the
next hur dle.
5. Land on the right foot, and immediately repeat the hop over the
next two hur dles.
6. Land on the left foot, and immediately hop right over the first
hurdle wi th the left f oot, using both arms to assist.
7. Land on the left foot, and immediately repeat the hop over the
next thr ee hur dles; finish b y landing on the right f oot.
COMMON ERRORS
Not reflecting subsequent takeoff direction in the body
lean (i.e., the center of mass in the takeoff and the
landing before direction change should reflect the
direction of travel in the subsequent movement; failure
to do so increases the ground contact time and reduces
the effectiveness of the drill)
Not increasing ground contact time for both the two-
hurdle hop and the change of direction movement,
meaning insufficient force is produced in the jump
1331
  20  PROGRESSIVE LATERAL JUMP
Intensi ty level: High
Direction:  Diagonal ly later al and v ertical
Equipment:  String tied at athlete’ s eye level and loosely secur ed to
the gr ound at a 45-degr ee angle to the gr ound
Starting position: Get into a comfortable, upright stance on one side
of the string next to the anchor on the gr ound.
Arm action:  Double arm
Preparatory mo vement:  Begin wi th a countermo vement.
Movements:
1. Explosiv ely jump diagonal ly (sidew ays and forward) over the
string using both arms to assist the mo vement.
1332
2. Dorsiflex the ankles in preparation for an active flat-foot
landing.
3. Land on the other side of the string, and immediately repeat the
jump diagonal ly forward. Continue the jumping sequence  over
the string as i t gets pr ogressively higher .
Note:  As the string gets higher , the athlete will need a longer ground
contact time and more hip and knee flexion to clear the string.
Ensur e that the anchor on the string enables the string to give way
should the athlete mak e contact wi th it.
COMMON ERRORS
Changing the orientation of the hips (i.e., rotate in the
transverse plane) during takeoff, which increases the
ground contact time on the subsequent jump
Not increasing ground contact time and hip and knee
flexion through the sequence, meaning insufficient force
is produced as the required jump height increases
1333
Bounds
  21  SKIP
Intensi ty level: Low
Direction:  Horizontal and v ertical
1334
Starting position: One leg is lifted to approximately 90 degrees of hip
and knee flexion wi th the ankle dorsi flexed.
Arm action:  Reciprocal (as one leg is lifted, the opposi te arm is
lifted)
Preparatory mo vement:  Begin wi th a countermo vement on one leg.
Upward movement: Drive up and forward on one leg. The opposi te
leg should r emain in the starting flex ed posi tion unti l landing.
Down ward movement:  Land in the starting position on the same leg.
Immediately r epeat the skip wi th the opposi te leg.
COMMON ERRORS
Rotating at the hip and shoulders during the movement
(which should be in the sagittal plane only), detracting
from the velocity achieved
Coordination errors in the reciprocal arm and leg action,
which detract from the forward momentum achieved
1335
  22  POWER SKIP
Intensi ty level: Low
Direction:  Vertical and horiz ontal
Starting position: One leg is lifted to approximately 90 degrees of hip
and knee flexion wi th the ankle dorsi flexed.
Arm action:  Double arm
Preparatory mo vement:  Begin wi th a countermo vement on one leg.
Upward movement:  Drive up and forward on one leg. Move the
flexed, non-jumping leg up and into greater hip and knee flexion
while jumping. Both arms should be used to assist with the upward
movement.
Down ward movement:  Land in the starting position on the same leg.
Immediately r epeat the skip wi th the opposi te leg.
Note:  Emphasis is on high-qual ity ground contact and leg drive as
athletes determine the effectiveness of the skip. This movement
should be more vertical and with a faster ground contac t than the
higher intensi ty linear bounding dri lls listed later in the chapter .
COMMON ERRORS
Not attacking the ground with significant intensity to
accelerate the center of mass forward in subsequent
takeoff; this influences the subsequent flight phases and
landings
Coordination errors in the double-arm action, which
detracts from the forward momentum achieved
1336
  23  LATERAL SKIP
Intensi ty level: Medium
Direction:  Vertical and later al
Starting position: One leg is lifted to approximately 90 degrees of hip
and knee flexion with the ankle dorsiflexed. This leg should be
opposi te to the direction of movement (i.e., if the skip is to the right,
the left leg should be r aised).
Arm action:  Reciprocal (as one leg is lifted, the opposi te arm is
lifted)
Preparatory movement:  Drive the lifted leg forcefully toward the
ground and away from the direction of movement so that it contacts
the gr ound outside of the base of support.
Upward movement:  The lateral drive of the down ward leg will cause
the body to move up and sideways away from the foot contact. As
this happens, the other leg should flex at the hip and knee in flight.
The drive leg typical ly takes a small adjustment step to aid stability
and rh ythm in the action.
1337
Down ward movement:  Land in the starting position on the same leg.
Immediately repeat the skip, continuing the lateral movement for a
number of repetitions or over a given distance, then use the
opposi te leg.
COMMON ERRORS
Not contacting the ground with sufficient lateral distance
from the hip to cause sideways momentum to occur
Not controlling rotations at the hip and shoulders during
the movement, which detracts from the lateral velocity
achieved
1338
  24  LINEAR BOUND
Intensi ty level: Medium
Direction:  Horizontal and v ertical
Starting position: Get into a comfortable, upright stance with feet
hip-width apart.
Arm action:  Single arm
1339
Preparatory movement:  Jog at a comfortable pace; begin the drill
with the left f oot forward.
Upward movement: Push off with the left foot as it contacts the
ground. During push-of f, bring the right leg forward by flexing the
thigh to a position approximately parallel with the ground and the
knee at 90 degr ees, wi th the ankle sti ff and dorsi flexed.
During this fl ight phase of the dri ll, reach f orward with the left arm.
Down ward movement:  Attack the ground with an active flat-foot
contact. Land on the right leg, and immediately repeat the sequence
on the opposi te side.
Note:  A linear bound is an exagger ation of the running gait; the goal
is to co ver as gr eat a distance as possible during each stride.
COMMON ERRORS
Not achieving sufficient horizontal velocity to initiate the
driving action of the bound
Not achieving sufficient height with the lead leg in the
flight phase to attack the ground with enough force to
accelerate the athlete forward
Overreaching with the lead leg and then not driving
down under the hips
1340
  25  DOUBLE-ARM LINEAR BOUND
Intensi ty level: Medium
Direction:  Horizontal and v ertical
Starting position: Get into a comfortable, upright stance with feet
hip-width apart.
Arm action:  Double arm
Preparatory movement:  Jog at a comfortable pace; begin the drill
with the right f oot forward.
Upward movement: Push off with the right foot as it contacts the
ground. During push-of f, bring the left leg forward by flexing the
thigh to a position approximately parallel with the ground, the knee
at 90 degrees, and the ankle dorsiflexed. During this flight phase of
the drill, reach forward with both arms. Sequence the arm swing so
that they come forward from behind the body into landing, and
forward from the hips to r each in f ront of the body during tak eoff.
Down ward movement:  Land with an active flat-foot on the left leg
and immediately r epeat the sequence on the opposi te side.
Note:  A bound is an exagger ation of the running gait; the goal is to
cover as gr eat a distance as possible during each stride.
COMMON ERRORS
Not achieving sufficient horizontal velocity to initiate the
driving action of the bound
Coordination errors between arm and leg action; both
arms should be forward as the athlete takes off and
behind as the athlete lands
Overreaching with the lead leg
1341
Box Drills
  26  DROP STEP TO LATERAL BOUND
AND RETURN
Intensi ty level: High
Direction:  Lateral and v ertical
Equipment:  Plyometric bo x, 6 to 18 inches (15-46 cm) high
Starting position: Get into a comfortable, upright stance with feet
hip-width apart on the plyometric box; toes should be near the edge
of the bo x.
Arm action:  None
Preparatory movement:  Step from the box with the right foot, ankles
dorsiflexed.
Down ward movement:  Land on the ground with active flat foot
contact in the right f oot.
Upward movement:  Immediately push up and sidew ays toward the
left. Land on the left foot and immediately push back toward the
1342
right. Land on the right foot in front of the box and immediately
stabilize the landing, wi th hips and knees al igned wi th toes.
Note:  The trunk orientation should  change in the flight so that the
athlete is leaning toward the intended direction of travel into the
landing.
COMMON ERRORS
Not orienting the body in landing to facilitate optimal
lateral takeoff
Absorbing the landing force through excessive hip and
knee flexion, prolonging the ground contact time
Crossing the foot of the non-landing leg behind the
landing leg
1343
  27  SINGLE-LEG PUSH-OFF
Intensi ty level: Low
Direction:  Vertical
Equipment:  Plyometric bo x, 6 to 18 inches (15-46 cm) high
Starting position: Stand facing the plyometric box with one foot on
the ground and one foot on the box. The heel of the foot on the box
should be near the bo x’s closest edge.
Arm action:  Double arm
Preparatory movement:  Lift the front foot slightly so that it can be
driven down into the bo x.
Upward movement: Drive the front foot down into the box to cause
an upw ard jumping action.
Down ward movement:  Land with the same foot on the box; this foot
should land just before the ground foot. Immediately repeat the
movement.
COMMON ERRORS
Not orienting the body at takeoff to optimally generate
vertical force
Not creating sufficient vertical force with the front foot
1344
  28  ALTERNATING-LEG PUSH-OFF
Intensi ty level: Low
Direction:  Vertical
Equipment:  Plyometric bo x, 6 to 18 inches (15-46 cm) high
Starting position: Stand facing the plyometric box with one foot on
the ground and one foot on the box. The heel of the foot on the box
should be near the bo x’s closest edge.
Arm action:  Double arm
Preparatory movement:  Lift the front foot slightly so that it can be
driven down into the bo x.
Upward movement: Drive the front foot down into the box to cause
an upw ard jumping action.
Down ward movement:  Land with the opposi te foot on the box; this
foot should land just before the ground foot. Immediately  repeat the
movement, r eversing the f eet each r epetition.
1345
COMMON ERRORS
Not creating sufficient vertical force to enable the switch
of legs to occur above the box
Asynchronous actions between the front leg and back
leg, which means that the high knee position at the end
of the jump does not occur at the point of maximum
height or leg extension; this results in poor landing
positions that prolong ground contact times for the next
jump
  29  LATERAL PUSH-OFF
Intensi ty level: Low
Direction:  Vertical
Equipment:  Plyometric bo x, 10 to 18 inches (25-46 cm) high
1346
Starting position: Stand to one side of the plyometric box with one
foot on the ground and one foot on the box. The inside of the foot
on the bo x should be near the bo x’s closest edge.
Arm action:  Double arm
Preparatory mo vement:  None or sl ightly l ift the f oot of f the bo x.
Upward movement:  Jump up using the f oot on the bo x to push of f.
Down ward movement:  Land with the same foot on the box; this foot
should land just before the ground foot. Immediately repeat the
movement.
COMMON ERRORS
Not producing sufficient vertical force from the front foot
Poor coordination or strength deficiencies, which means
that peak height of the center of mass does not occur at
the same time as maximal extension of the lower limbs
and flexion in the shoulders
1347
  30  REAR FOOT–ELEVATED
MULTIDIRECTIONAL HOP
Intensi ty level: Medium
Direction:  Vertical and later al
Equipment:  Plyometric box, 6 to 18 inches (15-46 cm) high; mini-
hurdle, 6 to 24 inches (15-61 cm) high
Starting position: Start in a deep split squat position, with the rear
foot elevated on a plyometri c box (or equiv alent). The foot on the
ground should r est par allel to the mini-hur dle.
Preparatory mo vement:  None
1348
Upward movement:  Push off with the standing leg to rise vertical ly
and sideways over the mini-hur dle. Keep the ankle dorsiflexed in
preparation for an active flat-foot contact with the ground on
landing.
Down ward movement:  Land with the same foot on the opposi te side
of the hurdle. Immediately repeat the movement to the opposi te
side.
COMMON ERRORS
Not producing sufficient vertical force from the front foot
to push out of the squat position and clear the hurdle
with full extension in the hip and knee
Absorbing too much of the landing impact into the hip
and knee of the front leg, increasing ground contact time
1349
  31  SIDE-TO-SIDE PUSH-OFF
Intensi ty level: Medium
Direction:  Vertical
Equipment:  Plyometric bo x, 10 to 18 inches (25-46 cm) high
Starting position: Stand to one side of the plyometric box with one
foot on the ground and one foot on the box. The inside of the foot
on the bo x should be near the bo x’s closest edge.
Arm action:  Double arm
Preparatory mo vement:  None
Upward movement: Jump up and over the box using the foot on the
box to push of f.
Down ward movement:  Land with the opposi te foot on the opposi te
side of the top of the box; this foot should land just before the
ground f oot. I mmediately r epeat the mo vement to the opposi te side.
COMMON ERRORS
Not producing sufficient vertical force from the front foot
Poor coordination or strength deficiencies, which mean
that peak height of the center of mass does not occur at
the same time as maximal extension of the lower limbs
and flexion in the shoulders
1350
  32  BOX JUMP
Intensi ty level: Low
Direction:  Vertical and sl ightly horiz ontal
Equipment:  Plyometric bo x, 12 to 42 inches (30-107 cm) high
Starting position: Facing the plyometric box, get into a comfortable,
upright stance wi th feet hip- width apart.
Arm action:  Double arm
Preparatory mo vement:  Begin wi th a countermo vement.
1351
Upward movement:  Forcefully triple extend to jump onto the top of
the bo x using both legs.
Down ward movement:  Land on both feet in a half-squat position,
step down f rom the bo x, and r epeat.
Note:  The arm action contributes significantly to the upward
momentum of this jump. By having athletes perform the movement
with their hands on their hips, or their fingers interlock ed behind the
head and elbows pointing sideways, the lower body power required
to perf orm the jump can be signi ficantly incr eased.
COMMON ERRORS
Focusing on landing on the box and flexing hips and
knees early, thus reducing vertical power; the aim should
be to land on the box because of powerful extension into
the ground, maximizing the forward and upward
movement of the body
Not coordinating arm actions with the forward
movement of the body; powerful shoulder flexion should
be simultaneous with the lower body jumping action
1352
  33  BOX HOP
Intensi ty level: Low
Direction:  Vertical and sl ightly horiz ontal
Equipment:  Plyometric bo x, 6 to 42 inches (15-107 cm) high
Starting position: Facing the plyometric box, get into a comfortable,
upright stance  on one foot. The non-jumping leg is held in a
stationary posi tion wi th the hip and knee flex ed during the ex ercise.
Arm action:  Double arm
Preparatory mo vement:  Begin wi th a countermo vement.
Upward movement:  Forcefully triple extend and hop onto the top of
the bo x.
Down ward movement:  Land on the same foot in a triple flexion
position (hip, knee, and ankle flexed and stable), step down from
the bo x, and r epeat.
Note:  Although significant force may be required to hop onto boxes
in excess of 30 inches (76 cm), this is a low-intensi ty drill because
the athlete is accelerating against gravity and lands with less force
than his or her body weight because of this.
COMMON ERRORS
Focusing on landing on the box and flexing hips and
knees early, thus reducing vertical power; the aim should
be to land on the box because of powerful extension into
the ground, maximizing the forward and upward
movement of the body
Not coordinating arm actions with the forward
movement of the body; powerful shoulder flexion should
be simultaneous with the lower body jumping action
1353
  34  LATERAL BOX JUMP
Intensi ty level: Medium
Direction:  Vertical and sl ightly horiz ontal
Equipment:  Plyometric bo x, 6 to 42 inches (15-107 cm) high
Starting position: Stand to one side of the plyometric box; get into a
comfortable, upright stance wi th feet hip- width apart.
Arm action:  Double arm
Preparatory mo vement:  Begin wi th a countermo vement.
Upward movement:  Jump onto the top of the bo x using both legs.
Down ward movement:  Land on both feet in a half-squat position and
jump down, landing with an active flat-foot contact and optimal
ground contac t to enable the jump to be repeated in the opposi te
direction.
Note:  If the athlete steps down rather than jumps down from the
box, the drill would be classified as a low-intensi ty ballistic exercise.
Also, this drill can be made  into a low-intensi ty ballistic drill by
stepping down of f the bo x and jumping up and later ally only .
1354
COMMON ERRORS
Focusing on landing on the box and flexing hips and
knees early, thus reducing vertical power; the aim should
be to land on the box because of powerful extension into
the ground (and flexion of the shoulders), maximizing
the forward and upward movement of the body
Not leaning into the jump; bringing the center of mass
outside the base of support in the frontal plane will
assist the lateral action of the jump
  35  DROP FREEZE
Intensi ty level: Low
Direction:  Vertical
Equipment:  Plyometric bo x, 12 to 42 inches (30-107 cm) high
Starting position: Get into a comfortable, upright stance with feet
hip-width apart on the plyometric box; toes should be near the edge
of the bo x.
1355
Arm action:  None
Preparatory mo vement:  Step f rom the bo x.
Down ward movement:  Land flat footed on the ground with both
feet, quickly absorbing the impact on landing. Ensur e the hips,
knees, and toes align, with the trunk vertical. Step back onto the box
and repeat.
Note:  This drill teaches joint alignment and landing mechanics and is
often the first drill used in plyometric teaching and rehabilitation
progressions. Also, this can also be performed as a single- leg landing
drill.
COMMON ERRORS
Absorbing ground reaction forces while landing through
hip and knee flexion, rather than landing and
instantaneously holding position to develop load
tolerance
Losing the knee alignment with the toes when landing in
a knee valgus position, potentially compromising the
knee joint
1356
Depth Jumps
  36  DEPTH JUMP
Intensi ty level: High
Direction:  Vertical
Equipment:  Plyometric bo x, 12 to 42 inches (30-107 cm) high
Starting position: Get into a comfortable, upright stance with feet
hip-width apart on the plyometric box; toes should be near the edge
of the bo x.
Arm action:  Double arm
1357
Preparatory mo vement:  Step f rom the bo x.
Down ward movement:  Dorsiflex the ankles and land on the ground
with an activ e flat-foot contact wi th both f eet.
Upward movement:  On landing, immediately jump up as high as
possible.
Note:  When stepping  from the box, step straight out. Do not first
jump up or lower the center of gravity while stepping down, because
these adjustme nts will change the height from which the exercise is
performed. The time on the ground should be kept to a minimum;
there is an optimal relationship between ground contac t time and
resultant vertical force production. On landing, emphasis should be
on jumping up, with minimal horizontal movement (less than what is
shown in the thir d photo).
COMMON ERRORS
Absorbing ground reaction force as the athlete lands
through hip and knee flexion, which increases the
amortization phase and ground contact time; hips,
knees, and ankles should be stiff when landing to
optimize the ground contact time and rebound jump
height
Not dorsiflexing the ankle in preparation for ground
contact; this negates the active flat-foot contact and
increases ground contact time
1358
  37  DEPTH JUMP TO BOX JUMP
Intensi ty level: High
Direction:  Vertical and horiz ontal
Equipment:  Two ply ometric bo xes, 12 to 42 inches (30-107 cm) high
Starting position: Get into a comfortable, upright stance with feet
hip-width apart on the plyometric box, facing the second box; toes
should be near the edge of the bo x.
Arm action:  Double arm
Preparatory mo vement:  Step f rom the bo x.
Down ward movement:  Dorsiflex the ankles in flight in preparation
for an activ e flat-foot landing wi th both f eet.
Upward movement:  On landing, immediately jump onto the second
box.
Note:  When stepping  from the box, step straight out. Do not first
jump up or lower the center of gravity while stepping down, because
these adjustme nts will change the height from which the exercise is
performed. The time on the ground should be kept to a minimum;
1359
there is an optimal relationship between ground contac t time and
resultant vertical force production. Also, the distance between boxes
depends on experience and ability; the greater the distance between
boxes, the higher the intens ity of the jump. Begin with the boxes
placed 24 inches (61 cm) apart.
COMMON ERRORS
Absorbing ground reaction force as the athlete lands
through hip and knee flexion, which increases the
amortization phase and ground contact time; hips,
knees, and ankles should be stiff when landing to
optimize the ground contact time and rebound jump
height
Not dorsiflexing the ankle in preparation for ground
contact; this negates active flat-foot contact and
increases ground contact time
1360
  38  DEPTH JUMP INTO DIRECTIONAL
SPRINT
Intensi ty level: High
Direction:  Vertical and later al
Equipment:  Plyometric box, 12 to 42 inches (30-107 cm) high; a
partner
Starting position: Get into a comfortable, upright stance with feet
hip-width apart on the plyometric box; toes should be near the edge
of the bo x.
1361
Arm action:  Double arm
Preparatory mo vement:  Step f rom the bo x.
Down ward movement:  Dorsiflex the ankles in preparation for an
active flat-foot landing with both feet. Have a partner point to the
right or left just bef ore landing.
Upward movement:  On landing, immediately sprint in the direction
determined b y the partner .
Note:  When stepping  from the box, step straight out. Do not first
jump up or lower the center of gravity while stepping down, because
these adjustme nts will change the height from which the exercise is
performed. The time on the gr ound should be k ept to a minimum.
COMMON ERRORS
The athlete prioritizing the sprint over landing
mechanics, leading to poor alignment on landing
The partner signaling which direction to sprint too late
for the athlete to prepare for landing and a reactionary
sprint; body lean and weight distribution between the
inside and outside of the feet are important
considerations for successful sprints from landing
1362
  39  DEPTH JUMP TO LONG JUMP
Intensi ty level: High
Direction:  Vertical and horiz ontal
Equipment:  Plyometric bo x, 12 to 42 inches (30-107 cm) high
Starting position: Get into a comfortable, upright stance with feet
hip-width apart on the plyometric box; toes should be near the edge
of the bo x.
Arm action:  Double arm
Preparatory mo vement:  Step f rom the bo x.
Down ward movement:  Dorsiflex the ankles in preparation for a flat-
foot landing on both f eet.
1363
Upward movement:  On landing, immediately jump forward as far as
possible wi th both f eet.
Note:  When stepping  from the box, step straight out. Do not first
jump up or lower the center of gravity while stepping down, because
these adjustme nts will change the height from which the exercise is
performed. The time on the ground should be kept to a minimum;
there is an optimal relationship between ground contact and
resultant horiz ontal pr ojection.
COMMON ERRORS
Not achieving an optimal forward-leaning angle through
landing (i.e., too vertical and the ground contact time is
increased or horizontal distance is lost, whereas leaning
too far forward reduces the ground reaction force
applied)
Not pushing maximally into the ground to optimize the
lower limb push for horizontal distance
1364
1365
  40  DEPTH JUMP TO 180-DEGREE
TURN
Intensi ty level: High
Direction:  Vertical and horiz ontal
Equipment:  Plyometric bo x, 12 to 42 inches (30-107 cm) high
Starting position: Get into a comfortable, upright stance with feet
hip-width apart on the plyometric box; toes should be near the edge
of the bo x.
Arm action:  Double arm
Preparatory mo vement:  Step f rom the bo x.
Down ward movement:  Dorsiflex the ankles in preparation for an
active flat-foot landing wi th both f eet.
Upward movement:  On landing, immediately jump up as high as
possible with both feet. While in the air, turn 180 degrees to land
facing the opposi te direction.
Note:  When stepping  from the box, step straight out. Do not first
jump up or lower the center of gravity while stepping down, because
these adjustme nts will change the height from which the exercise is
performed. The time on the gr ound should be k ept to a minimum.
COMMON ERRORS
Not controlling the rotational component of the rebound
takeoff, leading to poor joint alignment in the 180-
degree landing
Not achieving sufficient ground contact to enable a
rebound flight time that is long enough for a full turn to
be completed
1366
  41  DEPTH HOP
Intensi ty level: High
Direction:  Vertical
Equipment:  Plyometric bo x, 12 to 42 inches (30-107 cm) high
Starting position: Get into a comfortable, upright stance with feet
hip-width apart on the plyometric box; toes should be near the edge
of the bo x.
Arm action:  Double arm
Preparatory mo vement:  Step f rom the bo x with one f oot.
Down ward movement:  Dorsiflex the ankles in preparation for an
active flat-foot landing on one f oot.
Upward movement:  On landing, immediately hop up as high as
possible with the landing foot. The other leg should be actively
flexed during the upward movement to contribute to vertical
momentum.
Note:  When stepping  from the box, step straight out. Do not first
jump up or lower the center of gravity while stepping down, because
these adjustme nts will change the height from which the exercise is
1367
performed. The time on the ground should be kept to a minimum;
there is an optimal relationship between ground contac t time and
resultant vertical and horizontal force. This is a very advanced form
of the depth jump and should be performed only by those with
adequate experience, ability, and strength as demonstr ated in other
versions of the depth jump .
COMMON ERRORS
Absorbing ground reaction force as the athlete lands
through hip and knee flexion, which increases the
amortization phase and ground contact time; the hips,
knees, and ankles should be stiff when landing to
optimize the ground contact time and rebound hop
height
Not dorsiflexing the ankle in preparation for ground
contact; this negates the active flat foot contact and
increases ground contact time
1368
UPPER BODY PLYOMETRIC DRILLS
Throws
  42  CHEST PASS
Intensi ty level: Low
Direction:  Forward
Equipment:  Medicine or plyometric ball weighing 8 to 30 pounds (4-
14 kg); w all or partner
Starting position: Get into a comfortable, upright stance with feet
hip-width apart; face the wall or partner approximately 10 feet (3 m)
away. Raise the bal l to chest lev el with the elbows flex ed.
1369
Preparatory movement:  Begin with a countermo vement in the hips,
knees, and ankles as well as the arms (i.e., cocking the arms by
moving them sl ightly backw ard before the thr ow).
Arm action:  Extend the legs forcefully, and transfer the power to
both arms, throwing the ball to the wall or partner by extending the
elbows. When the wall or partner returns the ball, catch it, return to
the starting posi tion, and immediately r epeat the mo vement.
COMMON ERRORS
Not initiating the movement from the legs, reducing the
impulse to the ball
Not coordinating or sequencing the transfer of power
from the lower body to the upper body, reducing the
impulse to the ball
1370
  43  TWO-HAND OVERHEAD THROW
Intensi ty level: Low
Direction:  Forward and down
1371
Equipment:  Medicine or plyometric ball weighing 8 to 20 pounds (4-
9 kg); w all or partner
Starting position: Get into a comfortable, upright stance with feet
hip-width apart; face the wall or partner approximately 10 feet (3 m)
away. Raise the bal l overhead.
Preparatory movement:  Begin with a countermo vement (i.e., cock
the arms b y moving them sl ightly backw ard before the thr ow).
Arm action: Using both arms, throw the ball to the wall or partner ,
keeping the elbows extended . When the wall or partner returns the
ball, catch the ball and immediately repeat the throw. The partners
can also bounce the ball on the ground between them for a
down ward movement and a catch on the r ebound.
COMMON ERRORS
Arching the back in the start position, increasing lumbar
spine involvement (rather than hip flexion) in the
throwing action
Not coordinating or sequencing downward throwing
action so the optimal horizontal distance is not achieved
1372
  44  ROTATIONAL THROW
Intensi ty level: Low
Direction:  Forward through f rontal plane
Equipment:  Medicine or plyometric ball weighing 8 to 35 pounds (4-
16 kg); w all
Starting position: Start in a lunge stance. The front leg (with the hip,
knee, and ankle aligned) should face the wall approximately 3 to 6
feet (1-2 m) away. The rear leg should be external ly rotated at the
hip so that the foot is flat on the ground and pointing approximately
parallel to the w all. Hold the bal l at w aist height in f ront of the body .
Preparatory movement:  Begin with a countermo vement so that the
ball is brought back outside of the hip furthest from the wall and the
1373
weight is shifted to this hip. (A countermo vement for plyometric
throws requires cocking the arms—that is, moving the arms slightly
backw ard before the actual thr ow.)
Arm action:  Initiate the movement with a rotational drive of the hips
that continues through the trunk, bringing the ball across the body
so that it gains momentum. Using both arms, complete the
rotational arc of the ball so that it is released and thrown against the
wall as it passes the front hip. Catch the rebound, and immediately
repeat the mo vement.
Note:  This exercise can be made more of a hip-ini tiated movement
by shifting the weight onto the rear foot and abducting the hip
(frontal plane) to bring weigh t onto the rear foot; this variation may
benefi t baseba ll pitchers seeking more leg-driv en throwing action.
Golfers may find it beneficial to rotate the hip in the transverse plane
(not move in the frontal plane). Both variations enable the rear hip
to initiate the action and ac celerate the trunk r otation.
COMMON ERRORS
Rotating from the lumbar spine and trunk rather than
shifting weight to facilitate the hip drive
Over-relying on the upper body to throw the ball
compared to using the lower body and hip rotation to
enable a speed multiplication effect through the trunk to
achieve greater impulse on the ball
1374
  45  SINGLE-ARM THROW
Intensi ty level: Medium
Direction:  Forward
Equipment:  Medicine or plyometric ball weighing 1 to 5 pounds (0.5-
2.3 kg); w all or partner
Starting position: Get into a comfortable, upright stance with feet
hip-width apart; face the wall or partner approximately 10 feet (3 m)
away. Raise the ball in one hand to a position of 90 degrees of
shoulder abduction and 90 degrees of elbow flexion, with the arm
rotated so the f orearm is perpendicular to the gr ound.
Preparatory movement:  Begin with a countermo vement (i.e., cock
the arm b y moving i t slightly backw ard before the thr ow).
1375
Arm action: Using one arm, throw the ball to the wall or partner .
When the wall or partner returns the ball, catch the ball and return
to the starting  position, allow the shoulder to external ly rotate
slightly, and immediately r epeat the thr ow.
Note:  This drill may also be performed using a natural throwing
motion. Performing the action from a half-kneel ing position may help
isolate the upper body action of the thr owing motion.
COMMON ERRORS
Not achieving a stable throwing position due to lack of
thoracic mobility and overcompensations through
lumbar spine flexion
Not throwing from the shoulder but rotating through the
trunk (lumbar spine); this is likely to occur when the ball
is too heavy for the athlete
1376
  46  POWER DROP
Intensi ty level: High
1377
Direction:  Upward
Equipment:  Medicine or plyometric ball weighing 5 to 40 pounds (2-
18 kg); partner; ply ometric bo x 12 to 42 inches (30-107 cm) high
Starting position: Lie supine on the ground with elbows extended
and both shoulders in approximately 90 degrees of flexion; the head
should be near the base of the box. The partner should  be on the
box with the medicine bal l held abo ve the athlete’ s arms.
Preparatory mo vement:  None
Arm action:  When the partner drops the ball, catch it using both
arms and immediately thr ow the bal l back up to the partner .
COMMON ERRORS
Catching the ball too high and absorbing the impact
force, increasing the amortization phase
Releasing the medicine ball too early, reducing the
potential vertical impulse to the ball
1378
  47  HALF-KNEELING OVERHEAD
MEDICINE BALL THROW FOR DISTANCE
Intensi ty level: Low
Direction:  Forward
Equipment:  Medicine or plyometric ball weighing 5 to 30 pounds (2-
14 kg); w all or partner
1379
Starting position: Start in a half-kneel ing position, with the kneeling
knee directly under the hip of the supporting leg and the hip and
knee of the stance leg flexed to approximately 90 degrees with the
hip, knee, and toe aligned. The trunk should be upright, facing the
wall or partner  approximately  10 feet (3 m) away (not shown). Raise
the bal l above the head wi th the elbows extended.
Preparatory movement:  Begin with a countermo vement in the trunk
as well as the arms, cocking the arms (i.e., moving the arms slightly
backw ard, from the shoulder , before the actual thr ow).
Arm action:  Using both arms, throw the ball to the wall or partner by
flexing the trunk and extendi ng the shoulders, maintaining a straight
arm position. When the wall or partner returns the ball, return to the
starting posi tion, and immediately r epeat the mo vement.
COMMON ERRORS
Overextending the trunk in the start position,
detrimentally increasing the involvement of the lumbar
spine
Producing a cross-body throwing motion (either from not
having the ball directly overhead or by finishing with the
hands toward one hip); this produces trunk rotation,
which may increase the distance but changes the
exercise from an isolated sagittal plane movement
1380
  48  SINGLE-ARM REVERSE THROW
Intensi ty level: Low
Direction:  Backward
Equipment:  Small medicine or plyometr ic ball weighing 2 to 30
pounds (1-14 kg); partner
Starting position: Start in a tall-kneel ing position, with the kneeling
knee directly under the hip and the trunk upright, facing away from
a partner who is standing approximately 1 to 2 feet (30-61 cm)
behind the athlete. The partner starts with the ball. The athlete
starts with the throwing arm raised above the head with the elbow
extended.
Preparatory movement:  The partner throws the ball over the
athlete’ s head so that its trajectory takes it an arm’s length in front
of the athlete, tr aveling tow ard the opposi te knee to the r aised arm.
Arm action:  The athlete tracks the ball in a diagonal pattern with the
throwing arm and catches it with an overhand grip before it hits the
ground. Once caught,  the athlete keeps the elbow extended while
flexing the shoulder in the diagonal pattern, moving to a release
1381
point where the ball is thrown back to the partner when the elbow is
fully extended. I mmediately r epeat the mo vement.
Note:  Because this exercise trains smaller muscle groups involved in
scapular control, large increases in implement weight can make a big
difference to the intensi ty of the action.
COMMON ERRORS
Using compensatory muscle recruitments to control the
shoulder and throw the ball, compromising the objective
of the drill
Not catching the ball with sufficient arm extension to
challenge the deceleration–reacceleration moments
through the rotator cuff as a dynamic shoulder stabilizer
1382
1383
  49  VIKING THROW FOR HEIGHT
Intensi ty level: Low
Direction:  Vertical
Equipment:  Medicine or plyometric ball weighing 10 to 50 pounds
(5-23 kg)
Starting position: Start in an upright stance with the medicine ball
held in str aight arms in f ront of the middle of the body .
Preparatory movement:  Initiate a countermo vement by performing a
deep and r apid squat action, k eeping the bal l held in str aight arms.
Arm action:  From the base of the counter movement, perform a rapid
triple extension of the hips, knees, and ankles to drive the ball
vertical ly. As the body rises, continue the upward momen tum of the
ball so that it is released and thrown as high as possible at the top
of the triple extension.
COMMON ERRORS
Not optimizing leg extension and transferring power to
the upper body, reducing the impulse to the medicine
ball
Releasing the ball too early (before full leg and trunk
extension and shoulder flexion), reducing the impulse to
the medicine ball
1384
  50  MEDICINE BALL SLAM FROM
SINGLE-LEG BALANCE
Intensi ty level: Low
Direction:  Down ward
Equipment:  Medicine or plyometric ball weighing 10 to 30 pounds
(5-14 kg)
Starting position: Start in a single leg Roman ian deadl ift position,
with the trunk parallel to the ground and the hips hinged and level
with one leg extended straight behind the body. The stance foot
should be flat on the ground with weight distributed toward the heel.
The shoulders should be flexed so the straight arms are holding the
medicine bal l level with the head.
Preparatory movement:  Initiate a small countermo vement by flexing
the shoulders.
1385
Arm action:  Keeping the arms straight, slam the ball directly down
into the ground, maintaining  a stable trunk and hip position. Catch
the rebound and repeat the movement, then repeat on the
contralater al leg.
Note:  With the shoulder position, small increases in load can make a
big impact on drill intensi ty. This drill also can be adapted to a chest-
dominant pattern by starting with the ball held at the chest and
slammed into the gr ound f rom ther e.
COMMON ERRORS
Not achieving a stable and balanced position at the hips
to form a stable platform from which to throw the ball
Hyperextending into the lumbar spine to achieve
sufficient power to throw the ball to the ground rather
than throwing from the shoulder
1386
Plyometric Push-Ups
  51  DEPTH PUSH-UP
Intensi ty level: Medium
Direction:  Vertical
Equipment:  Medicine or plyometric ball (or stable implement of
similar height)
Starting position: Lie in a push-u p position, with the hands on the
medicine bal l and elbows extended.
Preparatory mo vement:  None
1387
Down ward movement:  Quickly remove the hands from the medicine
ball and drop down. Contact the ground with hands slightly wider
than hip-width apart and elbows slightly flexed. Allow the chest to
almost touch the medicine bal l by letting the elbows flex.
Upward movement:  Immediately and explosiv ely push up by fully
extending the elbows. Quickl y place the palms on the medicine ball
and repeat the mo vement.
Note:  When the upper body is at maximal height during the upward
movement, the hands should be higher than the medicine bal l.
COMMON ERRORS
Not achieving sufficient tension in the arms to stop the
downward movement of the chest, which collapses onto
the medicine ball
Not achieving sufficient bilateral vertical force to land
with both hands onto the medicine ball in a balanced
fashion
1388
  52  LATERAL TRAVEL PUSH-UP
Intensi ty level: High
Direction:  Lateral
Equipment:  Medicine bal l or a stable implement of simi lar height
Starting position: Get into a push-up position, with one hand on the
medicine ball (elbow partial ly flexed) and one hand on the ground,
elbow extended (not shown).
Preparatory mo vement:  None
Down ward movement:  Keeping both hands in place, rapidly drop
down into a push-up deep enough so that the chest is level with the
top of the medicine bal l (or lower).
Drill movement:  Immediately and explosiv ely push up and sidew ays
by fully extending the elbows. The trunk should move laterally
across the medicine ball while quickly switching hands (the hand
that was on the ground now lands on the medicine ball, and vice
versa). Immediately on landing, repeat the movement in the
opposi te direction (al ternate hands wi th each r epetition).
Note:  When the upper body is at maximal height during the upward
movement, both hands should be abo ve the medicine bal l.
COMMON ERRORS
Leading the vertical movement with the hips rather than
pushing through the upper body
Not achieving sufficient vertical height to travel across
the ball (which should not move)
1389
Trunk Plyometrics
  53  45-DEGREE SIT-UP
Intensi ty level: Medium
Equipment:  Medicine or plyometric ball weighing 5 to 30 pounds (2-
14 kg); a partner
1390
Starting position: Sit on the ground with the trunk at an
approximately 45-degr ee angle. The partner should be in front with
the medicine bal l.
Preparatory movement:  The partner throws the ball to the athlete’ s
outstr etched hands.
Drill action:  Once the partner throws the ball, the athlete catches it
using both arms with minimal trunk extension and immediately
returns the bal l to the partner .
Note:  The force used to return the ball to the partner should come
predominantly f rom the abdominal muscles.
COMMON ERRORS
Extending at the hips to absorb the force of the ball,
increasing the amortization phase and reducing the
efficacy of the exercise
Not keeping the foot in contact with the ground,
reducing the stable base from which to exert force
1391
  54  SEATED ROTATIONAL MEDICINE
BALL THROW
Intensi ty level: Medium
Equipment:  Medicine or plyometric ball weighing 5 to 30 pounds (2-
14 kg); a w all or partner
Starting position: Sit on the ground with the trunk at an
approximately 45-degr ee angle. The partner should stand to the side
with the medicine bal l.
Preparatory movement:  The partner throws the ball to the athlete’ s
outstr etched hands.
Drill action:  Once the partner throws the ball, the athlete should
track it across the body and catch it using both arms with minimal
1392
trunk extension . The rotation of the trunk should be decelerated and
then rotated in the opposi te direction to immediately return the ball
to the partner .
Note:  The force used to return the ball to the partner should come
predominantly f rom the abdominal muscles and trunk r otation.
COMMON ERRORS
Not rotating sufficiently to optimize the SSC within the
trunk musculature
Not keeping the foot in contact with the ground,
reducing the stable base from which to exert force
1393
  55  LEG PUSHDOWN
Intensi ty level: High
Equipment:  A partner
Starting position: Lie on the ground with slightly flexed knees and
the hips flexed to 90 degrees (not shown). The hands should hold
the partner ’s ankles f or stabi lity (shown).
1394
Preparatory movement:  Brace the core. Breathe in and pull the ribs
down toward the hips to tighten the core musculatur e to prevent the
lumbar spine f rom going into f orced extension during the mo vement.
Drill action:  The athlete raises the legs toward the partner ’s
outstr etched hands, and the partner briefly grasps the athlete’ s
lower legs before forcefully pushing the athlete’ s legs down toward
the ground. Before the legs reach the ground, the athlete
deceler ates and ultimately stops the down ward movement before
flexing the hips to return to the starting position to reset for the next
repetition. I mmediately r epeat the mo vement.
Note:  Intensi ty may be increased by using greater force of the
down ward push or by altering the direction of the push so that the
leg action is not pur ely in the sagi ttal plane.
COMMON ERRORS
Lowering the legs without waiting for the partner to
push them to the ground, reducing the eccentric load of
the exercise
Not controlling the lumbopelvic position and extending
the spine as the legs are lowered, increasing the
pressure on the lower back musculature
1395
KEY TERMS
active flat f oot
amortization phase
ascending complex tr aining
back squat equiv alent str ength
balance
ballistic ex ercise
bound
1396
box jump
complex tr aining
concentric phase
contrast training
coupl ing phase
depth jump
descending sets
dynamic v algus
eccentric phase
foot contact
hop
jump
muscle spindle
negativ e foot speed
parallel elastic component (PEC)
plyometric ex ercise
potentiation
power
progressive overload
rebound ex ercise
series elastic component (SEC)
slam
stretch r eflex
stretch r eflex latency
stretch-shortening cy cle (S SC)
throw
STUDY QUESTIONS
  1.  Stor ed elastic energy is used to increase force production
during which phase of ply ometric ex ercises?
  a.  ec centric
  b.  isometric
  c.  amortization
  d.  concentric
1397