# Section 20.5

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 20: Program Design and Technique for Speed and Agility Training

**Section:** 20.5 -- Program Design for Speed and Agility

**PDF Pages:** 1481--1511

Measure Description Interpretation
compr ehensiv ely assess how
athletes r espond during game
scenarios: (a) def ensive (mo ve
in the same dir ection as the
stimulus); (b) of fensive (mo ve
in the opposi te direction to the
stimulus).directional change bef ore the stimulus
finalized the mo vement. Negativ e
decision-making time is observ ed only
during r esponse to mo vements of
another person (video or human
stimulus), highl ighting the importance of
stimulus speci ficity during agi lity
protocols. The measur ement of decision-
making time in both def ensive and
offensive situations al lows str ength and
condi tioning pr ofessionals to identi fy
whether athletes need to dev elop
perceptual-cogni tive ability in a speci fic
game scenario .
COD phase-
specific
informationKinetic or kinematic data
pertaining to the appr oach or
acceleration, deceler ation,
turn, and r eacceleration
phases of a COD taskThis enables the pr actitioner to examine
the overall COD b y splitting the task into
several phases (e.g. , appr oach, COD ,
and exi t). This inf ormation enables the
identi fication of COD str ategy and
establ ishes str engths and ar eas for
development. Essential ly, it provides
further inf ormation r egarding how the
athlete achiev ed that completion time.
Advanced technology such as LiDAR or
radar ma y provide inf ormation r egarding
time and distance br aking and speed at
braking onset.
Alternativ e
consider ationsPractitioners should also
consider the athlete’ s
momentum into the COD task
because gr eater momentums
require greater br aking
impulse to deceler ate.
Additional moni toring of pacing
strategies is also essential
because athletes ma y regulate
entry speed to r educe
momentum to mak e
deceler ation or br aking easier .
Finally, video analysis is also
Note:  COD = change of direction; COM = center of mass; ETG = electr onic timing gate;
2D = two-dimensional; 3D= thr ee-dimensional; LiDAR = l ight detection and r anging.
1481
Measure Description Interpretation
recommended to observ e
technique to understand
compensatory str ategies, ar eas
for dev elopment, and
comparison to technical
models.
Note:  COD = change of direction; COM = center of mass; ETG = electr onic timing gate;
2D = two-dimensional; 3D= thr ee-dimensional; LiDAR = l ight detection and r anging.
1482
Conclusion
Speed, change of direction, and agility are well-establ ished measur es
of athletic prowess in most sporting contexts. For this reason,
strength and condi tioning professionals should be aware of how
these abilities are establ ished and modified through training plan
design and execution. These components of athletic movement and
game play are underpinned by task-speci fic force application. This
task-speci fic force production must be large enough to stabilize the
athlete’ s body weight in the presence of gravity, displace the athlete
from one point to another , and continue moving the athlete at high
velocities.
Running speed is associated with the relationship between step
length and rate. Sprinting is a near-maximum to maximum run that
is defined by large rates of force developed within a short stance
time. Better sprinters spend more time in the air as a result of
increased step lengths that occur at faster rates than those of their
slower counterparts and are better able to produce larger net forces
that are oriented optimal ly for effective acceleration and top speed.
Agility encompasses the skills and abilities needed to explosiv ely
change movement direction, velocities, or modes in response to a
stimulus. Both sprinting and agility use the SSC and greater
neuromuscular efficiency compar ed to slower movements. Howev er,
agility includes perceptual-cogni tive demands such as visual search
scanning, decision making, anticipation, and reaction times that
make it a separ ate tr aining qual ity.
Strength and condi tioning professionals aiming to improve these
performance attributes should do so through the cyclic and
sequential arrangement of training phases that harmoniz e strength
training with speed, agility, or COD practice or some combination of
these. This training effect may best result from the incorpor ation of
exercises that are task specific and promote proper movement
mechanics. The training prescribed should reflect the results of a
needs analysis assessment at the beginning of a long phase or year.
1483
Furthermor e, subsequent training plans should be optimiz ed through
an ongoing athlete monitoring program, which can assist the
strength and condi tioning professional in determining how the
athlete is r esponding to the pr ogrammed agenda.
SPEED AND AGILITY DRILLS
SPEED DRILLS
  1  Ankling  675
  2  A-Skip  67 6
  3  B-Skip  678
  4  Switches   680
  5  Dribbles   681
  6  Straight-Leg B ound   682
  7  Sprint R esistance: I ncline for Acceleration   684
AGILITY DRILLS
  8  Deceler ation Dri ll  685
  9  Y Agility Drill  686
10  Multiplanar Ac celeration I nitiation B ox Drill  689
11  Evasion Dri ll  690
Speed Drills
  1  ANKLING
Ankling is a commonly prescribed sprint drill to develop the correct
foot contact str ategy during maximum- velocity sprinting.
Starting Position
Begin the exercise in a tall stance with the torso directly above
the hips, knees, and ankles (stack ed joints).
1484
Movement Phase
Initiate movement by pushing off one limb through the ankle,
achieving a small flight phase. For the subsequent foot ground
contact, the ankle should be in a neutral position and make
contact on the f orefoot under the hips or center of mass.
During ground contact there should be minimal knee and ankle
flexion. The athlete should be cued to “punch the ground” with
the limb, emphasizing short, stiff ground contacts with each
ground contact.
The trunk should remain upright with a slight lean and hips
extended (little to no flexion during ground contact). The
contralater al arm range of movement will be small, but the
speed of the arm movemen t should match the rate of foot
contacts.
Technique Tips
Ensur e an upright trunk and a void leaning back.
Make sure the athlete drives vertical ly with each foot contact,
emphasizing a stiff strategy landing on the forefoot with the
ankle in a neutr al posi tion.
Ensur e the arm movement is timed with the leg movement and
will be of a low ampl itude.
Avoid excessiv e hip flexion, resulting in excessiv e foot contact
ahead of the COM, with the aim for foot contact as close as
possible to under the COM.
1485
  2  A-SKIP
The A-skip is a commonly prescribed sprint drill to develop the
correct leg r ecovery mechanics f or maximum- velocity sprint running.
Starting Position
Begin the exercise in a tall stance with the torso directly above
the hips, knees, and ankles (stack ed joints).
Movement Phase
Initiate movement by lifting one leg to a flexed knee position in
which the top of the thigh is near parallel. The foot of the lifted
leg (swing leg) should be approximately at knee height of the
stance leg, with the heel pulled up under the buttocks and the
ankle dorsiflexed. This will result in the appear ance of a figure
four at the legs. The swing leg will always accord with this
description.
Begin the first skip by driving the swing leg down to the ground
through an active foot, establ ished through slight dorsiflexion.
Lift the big toe up to establ ish appr opriate dorsi flexion.
1486
Complete the drive down of the swing leg through the forefoot
until near –triple extension of the new stance leg oc curs.
The fore- to mid-foot of the new stance leg should land under
the hips, maintaining the appear ance of stack ed joints.
At the initiation of contact, the opposing leg should pop up
rapidly to cr eate a swing leg.
The force gener ated from the active push down should coincide
with a skipping motion that will result in a horizontal
displacement of the body down the tr ack.
Technique Tips
Maintain a tall postur e with relaxed shoulders through the entire
duration.
The arms should move at the same rate as the legs, with
minimal to no pausing of arm action between cy cles.
Regression and Progression
A regression of the drill includ es an A-march, which involves the
same movements but at a slower pace to establ ish the correct
leg recovery mechanics. If athletes struggle coordinating the
contralater al arm movement, the hands can be placed on the
hips ini tially.
To progress from the A-skip, a running form emphasiz es the leg
recovery action with the thighs reaching parallel with the
ground.
1487
  3  B-SKIP
The B-skip is a commonly prescribed sprint drill to develop the
correct leg recovery and subsequent touchdown mechanics for
maximum- velocity sprint running.
Starting Position
1488
Begin the exercise in a tall stance with the torso directly above
the hips, knees, and ankles (stack ed joints).
Movement Phase
Initiate movement by lifting one leg to a flexed knee position in
which the top of the thigh is near parallel (i.e., front-side
mechanics). The foot of the lifted leg (swing leg) should be
approximately at knee heigh t of the stance leg, with the heel
pulled up under the buttocks and the ankle dorsiflexed. This will
result in the appear ance of a figure four at the legs. The swing
leg wi ll always accord with this description.
Begin the first skip by aggressively driving the swing leg down
to the ground through an active foot, establ ished through slight
dorsiflexion. Lift the big toe up to establ ish appropriate
dorsiflexion. (The main difference between the A- and B-skip is
the more aggressive driving down of the swing leg to
emphasiz e correct touchdown  mechanics and increased angular
velocities.)
Complete the drive down of the swing leg through the forefoot
until near –triple extension of the new stance leg oc curs.
The fore- to mid-foot of the new stance leg should land under
the hips, maintaining the appear ance of stack ed joints.
At the initiation of contact, the opposing leg should pop up
rapidly to cr eate a swing leg.
The force gener ated from the active push down should coincide
with a skipping motion that will result in a horizontal
displacement of the body down the tr ack.
Technique Tips
Maintain a tall postur e with relaxed shoulders through the entire
duration.
The arms should move at the same rate as the legs, with
minimal to no pausing of arm action between cycles. If the
athlete strugg les initially to coordinate the contralater al arm
1489
action, the athlete could place the hands on hips to initially
master the corr ect leg r ecovery and touchdown action.
During the aggressive drive down of the swing leg, ensure the
leg sweeps back to contact the ground with the forefoot under
the hips.
Regression and Progression
A regression of the drill includes a B-march or -walk, which
involves the same movement s but at a slower pace to establish
the correct leg recovery and touchdown mechanics. A
progression from the B-skip involves a running form
emphasizing the leg recovery to touchdown action and
overhead variations to focus on trunk stability and lumbopelvic
control.
1490
  4  SWITCHES
Switches emphasiz e rapid limb switching and path of movement of
the feet that resemble the more linear path of movement associated
with accelerative sprinting.
Starting Position
1491
Stand on one leg with one leg flexed 90 degrees at the hip and
knee to ensur e the thigh is parallel with the ground. The ankle
is neutral or dorsiflexed, which emphasiz es front-side mechanics
and a positive shin angle. The contralater al arm is held with the
elbow flexed to <90 degrees and with the hand around the
height of the chin.
The foot of the standing leg is flat on the ground, and the
ipsilateral arm is r elaxed by the side of the body .
The trunk is upright wi th the head up and ey es looking f orward.
Movement Phase
While maintaining an upright trunk with the head up, the
athlete simultaneously drives the standing leg up and the flexed
leg down, emphasizing r apid swi tching of the l imbs.
The contralateral arm movement matches the speed of the leg
movement.
The landing of the previously flexed limb on the ground and the
standing limb to the flexed position should occur at the same
time. Pause in this position (initial position) before repeating for
a desir ed number of r epetitions.
Technique Tips
Ensur e an upright trunk and head with no leaning back or
excessiv e lumbar flexion.
Emphasiz e rapid leg and arm switching, avoiding excessively
high thigh and knee l ifts (>90 degr ees).
Progressions
Rather than perform with a pause between repetitions, this drill
can progress to performing repeatedly for a desired number of
repetitions on the spot (e.g. , 2 or 3) bef ore pausing.
A further progression would  be to add a mini-hop forward
between repetitions but still emphasizing the rapid limb,
switching to establ ish a more rhythmic pattern. Trunk stability
1492
and lumbopelvic control can be challenged with overhead
variations.
  5  DRIBBLES
This drill, which assists with many aspects of the technical running
model involving a scaled running practice, emphasiz es the more
circular path of the f oot during maximum- velocity sprinting.
Starting Position
Stand with the feet hip-width apart and the head and trunk
upright.
Movement Phase
Lift one leg so the foot is above the opposing ankle with toes
pointed up, then sweep the foot down and back to make foot
contact. As the center of mass moves ahead of the foot, the
foot should drive up and over the ankle. Repeat this circular
foot motion with each limb for the designated distance. The
1493
foot contact should be with the ankle in a neutral position and
may begin heel to toe wi th each f oot contact.
The drill will involve a low knee lift but will become larger with
progressions. The foot contact will also progress to forefoot
contact wi th these pr ogressions.
The trunk leans forward slightly with the head up and eyes
looking forward. The athlete adopts a contralater al arm
movement at a lower amplitude of maximal sprint running, but
the timing and range of motion should match the timing and
range of motion of the legs.
Technique Tips
Emphasiz e the cir cular r ecovery motion of the f oot.
Maintain a slight trunk lean with head up and eyes looking
forward.
Ensur e the contralater al arm movement matches the timing and
range of motion of the leg action.
Regressions and Progressions
If the athlete initially struggles with the ankle dribble, he or she
could lower the intensi ty to a walking pace and work on the
circular path of movement of the foot over the opposing ankle
using a heel–toe contact.
Progression from the ankle dribble involves greater range of
movement of the circular foot pattern, so the foot first reaches
calf height (cal f dribble) and then knee height (knee dribble).
Furthermor e, after mastering  these versions, progressions  could
involve dribble bleeds whereby the athlete may progress from
ankle to calf to knee dribble within the same repetition or blend
a knee dribble to a high-speed run.
1494
  6  STRAIGHT-LEG BOUND
This drill emphasiz es rapid retraction of the lower limb, offering
similarity to the desired touchdown leg mechanics of maximum-
velocity sprinting and increasing hip angular velocity and foot
touchdown v elocity.
Starting Position
Stand with the feet hip-width apart and the head and trunk
upright.
Movement Phase
After an initial upward and forward hop from one limb, while
maintaining a straight limb (extended knee and neutral ankle
position), drive the opposi te hip forward and then rapidly retract
the limb to make ground contact on the forefoot before
rebounding and r epeating wi th the opposi te limb.
Emphasiz e the rapid retraction of the limb in preparation for
ground contact, and ensur e that ground contact times remain
short and, ideal ly, under the hips.
The trunk should be maintained in an upright position (must
avoid leaning back), wi th the head up and ey es looking f orward.
1495
The athlete should adopt a contralater al limb movement that
matches the timing and r ange of motion of the l imbs.
Technique Tips
Maintain an upright trunk wi thout leaning back.
Emphasiz e rapid, forceful retraction of the limb toward ground
contact, and ensur e that ground contacts are short and under
the hips.
Adopt a contralater al arm movement that matches the timing
and range of motion of the lower l imbs.
Regressions and Progressions
If the athlete initially struggles with the straight-leg bound, the
athlete could lower the intensity by reducing the hip flexion
range of motion and speed  of retraction, and gradual ly and
progressively bui ld up the speed and r ange of motion.
Trunk stability and lumbopelvic control can be challenged with
overhead variations of straight-leg bounds, and straight-leg
bounds can be transitioned or blended into normal upright
running with the aim that previous straight-leg bounds will
transfer to increased hip angular velocities, limb retraction, and
active touchdowns with high velocities (i.e., 20-yard straight leg
build up into flying 20- yard sprint).
1496
  7  SPRINT RESISTANCE: INCLINE FOR
ACCELERATION
Incline sprintin g is a type of resisted sprinting that is prescribed to
promote physical and technic al improvements within the acceleration
phase of a sprint. Alternativ e approaches to using an incline include
using weighted sleds.
Starting Position
1497
Begin in the correct starting position (commonly called a
crouched start). First, split the stance position by placing the
dominant leg forward and dropping the back or swing leg by
one to two f oot lengths.
The length of split between the drive and swing leg is largely
determined by the compr omise between the (a) ability to
gener ate sufficient forces needed to overcome a lower center of
gravity and (b) comfort. In addition, the feet should be split in
such a manner  that the front and back legs are in line with the
pelvis, so that no unnecessary twisting of the hips oc curs.
Once the split stance has been establ ished, drop the back knee
straight down so that the shank (shin) is nearer (more parallel)
to the ground. This aids in promoting the proper driving position
needed to begin ac celeration.
With a tall and rigid torso, raise the arm that is opposi te to the
front or drive leg to a position near or slightly above the
forehead. The hand should be spaced approximately 6 to 8
inches (15-20 cm) away from the forehead. The rear arm
(opposi te to the rear or swing leg) should be pulled back to a
point at which the hand is near the lateral aspect of the
buttocks with an elbow angle  that may range from 100 degrees
to 120 degrees. This position allows for the arm action to assist
in producing sufficient propulsive forces to overcome static
inertia.
On completion of setup , lean the entire body forward so that
60% of the body weight is on the front leg. Avoid breaking at
the waist during this shift. The athlete should continue to feel
balanced and stable.
Movement Phase
After body weight has been transferred, the athlete can initiate
the sprint through an aggressive push down and through the
ground via the f ront or driv e leg.
1498
The back leg should also assist in force production but will leave
the ground earlier due to the starting stance position. Arm
action should be synchr onous wi th leg action.
Technique Tips
Cue the athlete to maximiz e accelerative mechanics through a
low heel recovery of the rear or swing leg. This should be
staged through the proper setup of the crouched starting
position described earl ier.
Coach the athlete to continue aggressively pushing against the
ground alongsi de an arm swing that may be cued to emphasiz e
a hand that is pulled down and back. Arm action often parallels
movements of the legs.
The torso should remain tall and tight with the head in a neutral
position. The torso and head are in line and will rise at the
same r ate as the hips gr adual ly rise.
Agility Drills
  8  DECELERATION DRILL
The deceler ation drill requires the athlete to reduce horizontal
momentum (negativ e acceleration) across a series of foot contacts
as an isolated agi lity action or prior to a COD maneuv er (35).
1499
Task
The athlete initiates a linear acceleration from a two-point static
position and sprints to a predetermined distance (i.e., 5, 10, or
20 yards or meters) before braking and deceler ating over a
series of steps as r apidly as possible.
Progressions and Regressions
Tasks can begin submaxima lly, preplanned, and over smaller
approach distances and thus velocity before increasing intent
and increasing  approach distances and subsequent velocities,
and momentum . Deceler ation drills can be further developed
through the use of generic and sport-speci fic stimul i. For
example, the “Stop at the Lights” game is a game-based agility
drill in which the athletes must react to the green (accelerate)
and red (deceler ate) signals  from the coach. Athletes race to
the end and are disqual ified if they are unable to stop on
command. Additional ly, drills can be further developed through
the use of auditory stimul i (i.e., “stop”) and partner or opponent
stimul i.
Variations
Practitioners can vary the initiation positions and planes of
motion (two-p oint, three-po int, falling, false step, amplitude
jump, crossover cut, pivot, torso rotation, drop step, pop steps)
and develop a range of different deceler ation actions to improve
movement solutions. Deceler ation positions include the
following:
Bilateral (athletic r eady posi tion)
Split posi tion
Transverse ( jockey posi tion)
Lateral deceler ation posi tion
Diagonal (cr ossover)
1500
  9  Y AGILITY DRILL
The Y agility drill requires the athlete to plant his or her foot laterally
opposi te to the direction of travel to create a propulsiv e impulse into
the new intended direction (35). Cutting is the key movement with
this dri ll.
Task
The athlete initiates a linear acceleration from a two-point static
position and sprints linearly to a predetermined distance (e.g., 5
yards or meters) and then performs a side-step cutting action
45 degrees to the left or right and accelerates a further 5 yards
or meters (or al ternativ e distance).
1501
Progressions and Regressions
Tasks can begin submaximal, preplanned, and applied over
smaller approach distances and, therefore, involve lower
approach velocities. The drill can then be progressed by
performing it maximal ly or by increasing the approach
distances, which would lead to greater approach velocities and
1502
momentum (thereby increasing the braking demand
experienced prior to and during the dir ectional change).
Y agility drills can be further progressed using generic or sport-
specific stimul i. For example, the drill can be adapted whereby
the athletes must react to auditory or visual stimul i when
approaching the turning area, such as a color cone or auditory
command (i.e., left or right). Moreover, the tasks can be further
developed by incorpor ating a sport-speci fic stimul i such as an
opponent and alternating between leading (attacking) and
following (def ending) thr ough the use of mirr or dri lls.
Variations
To improve movement solutions and create betwee n-skill
variabi lity and an adaptable performer , practitioners can vary
1503
the cutting techniques performed at the turning point during
preplanned and Y-shaped agility tasks. Alternativ e cuts include
the following:
Crossover cut. The athlete positions the plant foot on the
same side (ipsilateral) of the new direction (or sometimes
medial ly across the pelvic midline) and then crosses the
opposi te leg (contr alater al) in front of the body for the new
step in the new direction, accelerating in the same direction
of the push-of f leg (35).
Split step cut. The athlete performs a small jump (ampl itude
jump) before push-of f, landin g with both feet greater than or
equal to shoulder -width apart (not shown; it would come
after the second photo), and then, on landing, the
contralater al limb is used for push-of f into the intended
direction of tr avel (35).
1504
  10  MULTIPLANAR ACCELERATION
INITIATION BOX DRILL
This drill requires starting movements to accelerate the athlete in a
new dir ection (i.e. , forward, sidew ays, rearward).
Task
1505
The athlete starts in the center of a 5 × 5-yard or -meter box
and initiates an acceleration from a static position in a new
direction (i.e., forward, sidew ays, rearward) before decele rating
at the specific cone or zone. The athlete should begin
submaximal ly developing his or her ability to accelerate forward,
sidew ays, and rearward and practice a range of different
movements as outl ined her e:
Starting and accelerating forward (static initiation).  Bilateral
to false step, two-point stagger ed, three-point stance,
prone, kneeling, supine, two-point stagger ed with torso
rotation
Starting and accelerating sidew ays (static initiation).  Jab
step (side-step cut), split step (ampl itude jump), shuffle
step, crossover or pivot, kneeling, two-point stagger ed with
torso r otation
Starting and accelerating rearward (static initiation).  Pivot,
drop or pop turn, turns from nondominant and dominant
sides
1506
Progressions and Regressions
Multiplanar acceleration initiations to deceler ations can be
further developed using generic and sport-speci fic stimul i. For
example, multiplanar acceleration initiation box drills can be
progressed whereby the athletes must react to an auditory or
visual stimulus  when initiating their acceleration, such as a color
cone or auditory command (e.g., left, right, forward, rear left,
rear right) (figur e a). The tasks can be further developed by
incorpor ating a sport-speci fic stimul i such as an opponent and
alternating between leading (attacking) and following
(defending) through the use of mirror drills whereby the
defender has to mirror and copy the initiation movement and
direction of tr avel (figur e b).
1507
  11  EVASION DRILL
Task
Using a 10 × 10-yard (or -meter) box, the purpose of this open
drill from an attacking perspectiv e is to create space, take
space, create separ ation, evade an opponent, and penetrate
defensive lines accurately and efficiently and entering a specific
end zone (e.g., 1v1 evasive drill with two gates). A range of
different COD actions, deceler ation actions, or simply linear or
curvilinear speed actions could be performed to achiev e the
objectiv e. Conversely , from a defensive perspectiv e, the aim is
to prevent the attacker from penetr ating the defensive line and
entering the end zones, limiting space for the attacker,
potential ly making a tag, or delaying the opponent. The
defender is encour aged to identi fy kinematic and postur al cues
and anticipate and r eact to the opponent.
1508
Progressions and Regressions
A range of different mechanical and perceptual-cogni tive factors
can be manipulated within agility drills, which can create
variation, new learning environments, and problems to solve
while also influencing the task complexi ty and cogni tive loading,
which are summariz ed in table 20.7 (page 666). For example,
the pitch dimensions could be expanded (figur e a), which  can
increase the entry and exit velocities and momentums with a
variation in end zones for the attacker to target. To increase
game representativ eness, the addition of static mannequ ins or
defenders can further replicate the chaotic environments that
are often encounter ed in sports such as American footbal l
(figur e b). Finally, most multidirectional sports have multiple
attackers and defenders; thus, to increase specificity, 2v2 small-
sided games (and other configur ations) also can be used to
work on attacking and defensive transitions, organization, and
communication (figur e c).
1509
KEY TERMS
acceleration
actual ization
agility
backpedal ing
backw ard running
braking impulse
braking phase
1510
change of dir ection
coordinativ e overload
deceler ation
dynamic corr espondence
force
ground contact time
ground pr eparation
impulse
impulse–momentum r elationship
initiation
maneuv erability
momentum
negativ e acceleration
perception– action coupl ing
perceptual-cogni tive
periodization
propulsiv e phase
rate of f orce dev elopment (RFD)
recovery
scalar quanti ty
speed
spring–mass model (SMM)
sprinting
step f requency
step length
strength
stretch-shortening cy cle (S SC)
stride
transition
vector quanti ty
velocity
STUDY QUESTIONS
1511