# Section 20.2

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 20: Program Design and Technique for Speed and Agility Training

**Section:** 20.2 -- Neurophysiological Basis for Speed

**PDF Pages:** 1416--1430

The differences between elite and novice sprinters can be traced
to a single component. Much of the current literature on sprinting
(17, 105, 106) suggests that the amount of vertical force applied to
the ground during the stance phase at top speed may be the most
critical component to improving top speed. In addition, these greater
forces must be appl ied to the gr ound in the shortest period possible.
Application of force is neede d to displace a mass. In sprinting,
step length represents the displacement of mass. Elite male sprinters
achiev e a step length of 2.70 m (8.9 ft), whereas novice sprinters
displa y a step length of 2.56 m (8.4 ft) at maximum velocity (figure
20.6a) (62).
Since contact with the ground is needed to continue force
production and subsequent alterations in velocity, increasing the step
frequency theoretically would maximiz e the time available to produce
force. Elite male sprinters demonstr ate step frequency near 4.63
steps per second compar ed to novice sprinters, who produce a
lesser step frequency of 4.43 steps per second (figure 20.6b) (62).
In other words, elite sprinte rs need less ground contact time with
each step to exert the effort needed to displace their mass due to
their ability to create greater impulses. Thus, these faster sprinters
also spend more time in the air. Interestingly , elite sprinters displa y
times to reposition the swing leg that are similar to those of their
slower counterparts (62, 106).
1416
FIGURE 20.6  Step length  (a) and step r ate (b) in sprinters wi th varying qual ifications.
Data from Mann (2011).
Although the time required for staging the subsequent ground
contact is similar between elite and novice sprinters, elite sprinters
are able to propel themselv es farther down the track due to properly
directed vertica l forces. Mann (62) suggests that these vertical forces
are better directed toward the track due to an optimiz ed knee height
at maximal flexion of the recovering leg. This higher knee position
provides a greater time period for force production and subsequent
ground clearance (i.e., range of motion force movement principle).
This technical advantage may be further evidence for why elite
sprinters tend to produce most of their force within the first half of
the stance phase.
Additional ly, faster sprinters are able to achiev e higher velocities
through the continuous application of high forces in a short stance
phase, which results in longe r steps or steps occurring at a higher
rate. Within the elite setting (e.g., 100 m world championship
finalists), this results in male sprinters achieving velocities between
11.0 meters per second and 12.5 meters per second (24.6-28.0
mph) (46). Conversely , team sport athletes gener ally achiev e
maximum velocities of approximately 8.0 to 9.5 meters per second
(17.9-21.3 mph) (25). While force production is arguably the limiting
1417
factor, technical efficiency and properly designed training also limit
sprint speed.
Sprint speed is determined by an athlete’s step length
and step frequency; more successful sprinters tend to
have longer step lengths as a result of properly directed
forces into the ground while also demonstrating a more
frequent step rate. These findings suggest that RFD and
proper biomechanics are two of the primary limiting
factors influencing sprint performance.
Sprinting Technique Guidelines
Linear sprintin g is composed of a series of subtasks that can be
divided into the start, acceleration (figure 20.7), and top speed
(figure 20.8). While these phases of a sprint are technical ly distinct,
they all require the athlete to volitional ly move the lower limbs at
maximal speed s through a series of stance and flight phases. The
stance phase can be broken down further into a braking period
followed by a propulsiv e period. In contrast, the flight phase consists
of the recovery  and ground preparation  (i.e., late swing)
segments of the swing leg.
1418
FIGURE 20.7 Sprinting technique during the initial acceleration (i.e., the start) and the
acceleration, touchdown, midstance, and tak eoff of subsequent steps.
1419
FIGURE 20.8 Sprinting techniq ue at maximum velocity includes the toe-of f, maximal
vertical pr ojection (MVP), touchdown/midstance, and subsequent toe-of f phases.
Figure 20.9 is a sprint technique checkl ist that accompanies
figures 20.7 and 20.8. These recommendations are based on linear
sprinting and may be useful for both instruction and evaluation of
1420
the movements. Figure 20.10  on page 649 describes the
fundamental mo vements oc curring in maximum- velocity sprinting.
Technical Errors and Coaching
Table 20.1 highlights many common sprinting errors as well as
possible causes and coaching corrections. Quite often, these errors
are the result of the misappl ication of forces due to improper
coaching cues, insufficient mobility, or disruption to an athlete’ s
normal gait caused by external interference. For instance, an athlete
may demonstr ate overstriding due to a coaching drill (such as
reaching to successiv ely longer marks along the track to gain speed)
or the belief that acutely increasing step length will allow one to
catch up to a competi tor in a race. Regardless of the reason, the aim
of strength and condi tioning professionals should be to promote an
athlete’ s speed  through the proper transmission of forces into the
ground that wi ll optimiz e the athlete’ s gait cycle.
Figure 20.9  Sprinting technique checklist: start,
acceleration, and maximum velocity.
Start
The athlete should attempt to distribu te a balanced body weight through a
set position (blocks, three- or four-point stagger ed start) that uses segment
angles critical to produce forces necessary to deliver explosiv e forces from
the start.
Front lower leg angle should be appr oximately 90 degr ees.
Rear lower leg angle should be appr oximately 120 to 135 degr ees.
Aggressive extensio n of the hip, knee, and ankle of the front leg against the
block or gr ound should be observ ed.
After initially extend ing at the hip and knee, the rear leg should then
be rapidly flexed at the hip (to ~90 degrees), knee (to ~90 degrees),
and ankle (to neutral position) in preparation for foot contact of the
first step .
As the rear leg is driven forward, the opposi te arm should also drive
forward, mirroring the range of motion and timing of the rear leg. The
range of motion at the shoulder of each arm is lar ge.
1421
The head should be neutral, looking a few yards or meters ahead along the
track.
Acceleration
Posture
Forward inclination helps maximiz e propulsiv e force contribution and
depends on the absolute magni tude of force available. The forward lean
gradual ly reduces with each step, assuming an upright position by maximum
velocity.
The pelvis posi tion should be neutr al relative to torso .
The center of mass should be ahead of the foot during early acceleration
(first few steps), which gradual ly progresses to the center of mass being
slightly behind the f oot as the athlete pr ogresses to maximum v elocity.
The center of mass and hip position begin low and rise higher with each
step f rom early to late ac celeration to maximum v elocity.
Arms
The ranges of motion in the arms are wide to match the ranges of motion in
the lower body on the contralater al side (e.g., as the knee travels forward,
the opposi te arm tr avels forward).
The arms ar e driv en aggr essively backw ard.
Legs
During acceleration each step gets progressively longer , with ground contact
times getting shorter and flight times longer as the athlete advances to
maximum v elocity.
Rapid, large split of the thighs through the stance phase enhances leg
extension force while preparing the swing limb for rapid acceleration back
down to the ground, enabl ing high ground reaction forces (GRF) early
during gr ound contact.
Low heel recovery enables shorter steps and more cycle time dedicated to
force production. Heel recovery gains more height as the athlete progresses
to maximum v elocity.
The path of the heel and rest of the foot tends to be piston like (backw ard
and down ward) before progressing to a more cyclic action by maximum
velocity.
Forward-oriented shin angles gradual ly become more vertical as the athlete
progresses to maximum v elocity.
There should be rapid deceler ation of extending the thigh (back -side catch)
during the late stance to avoid prolonging ground contact and then enable
rapid subsequent r ecovery of the leg after tak eoff.
1422
The thigh forcefully retracts during the late swing to enable foot contact
behind the center of mass, enhanc ing production and direction (more
horizontal) of GRFs early in gr ound contact.
The foot and ankle maintain optimal stiffness. A stable foot position during
the early stance helps provide the foundation for the hip extensors to
contribute more effectively to forward propulsion while enabl ing storage and
release of elastic ener gy at the ankle.
Maximum Velocity
Posture
Slight forward lean
Head in neutr al posi tion looking tow ard intended dir ection of tr avel
High neutr al pelvis posi tion
Arms
Arm action  mirrors the contralater al limb (i.e., when the touchdown leg is in
its longest position the opposi te arm will be in its most open position to
balance the body).
The hand is driven hard down below  the waist on the downstr oke and
returns to the height of the athlete’ s chin with a more acute angle at the
elbow (appr oximately 90 degr ees on the r eturn).
Arms should not cr oss the midl ine of the body .
Legs
With a slight flex of the knee at takeoff, the hip is in a hyperextended
position and the ankle is plantar flex ed.
After toe-of f, the knee should flex and the ankle dorsiflex (passiv e folding)
as the thigh flexes forward at the hip to a high knee position. A high heel
recovery wher eby the f oot steps o ver the opposi te knee should be observ ed.
With the knee at its highest point (front-side catch), the tibia should be in a
high forward position, providing space for rearward acceleration of the thigh
to help gener ate lar ger ini tial GRFs during support.
The foot should travel down and back (negativ e foot speed before
touchdown).
The foot should touch down close to underneath the center of mass (will be
slightly in front). At touchdown the opposi te knee should be beside or
slightly in f ront of the knee of the touchdown leg.
During support, knee and ankle flexion should be minimal.
In the late stance (back -side catch), early hip flexor activation helps avoid
prolonged ground contact and deceler ates the extending limb, preventing
lower leg recovery behind the body after toe-of f (too much back-side
1423
mechanics), providing more optimal leg recovery (better timing and
improved front side posi tion).
Efficient rapid switching of limb positions requires efficient timing, enabled
by rapid switching  off of key muscles; thus, relaxation and rhythm are
essential to enable optimal timing and coordination and reduce energy
demands.
Adapted f rom Mann (2011).
Training Goals
The overarching goal of sprinting is to achiev e optimal step length
and step frequency through the correct application of force into the
ground. The transmission of high forces must occur within a short
stance phase,  also known as ground contac t time. During the
acceleration phase, propulsiv e forces assist in elevating the hips
above the ground to a point at which speed is no longer increasing
at large rates. This portion of the sprint, known as maximum
velocity, uses the SSC (through stiffness regulation) to propel the
athlete’ s center of mass down the tr ack horiz ontally.
Figure 20.10  Fundamental movements occurring in
maximum-velocity sprinting.
Early Flight
Eccentric hip flexion.  Deceler ates backw ard rotation of the thigh
Eccentric knee extension.  Deceler ates backw ard rotation of the leg and f oot
Eccentric ankle dorsi flexion.  Deceler ates ankle plantar flexion
Midflight
Concentric hip flexion.  Accelerates thigh f orward
Eccentric knee extension  followed b y eccentric knee flexion
Concentric ankle dorsiflexion.  Assists in reducing the limbs’ mome nt of
inertia
Late Flight
Concentric hip extension.  Rotates the thigh backw ard in preparation for foot
contact
1424
Eccentric knee flexion.  Accelerates the leg backw ard, limiting knee
extension; stops before foot strike (aided by concentric knee flexion to
minimiz e braking at touchdown)
Ankle in neutral position (avoid plantar flexed position).  Preparation for
ground contact to reduce Achilles’ tendon complex slack at touchdown to
optimiz e stor age of elastic ener gy during early support
Early Support
Continued concentr ic hip extension.  Minimiz es the braking effect of the foot
strike
Brief concentric knee flexion followed by eccentric knee extension.  Absorbs
the landing and facilitates power transfer from the hip to the ankle during
propulsion
Eccentric plantar flexion.  Stores potential elastic energy for subsequent
release to f acilitate gr eater pr opulsion during late support
Late Support
Eccentric hip flexion.  Deceler ates backw ard thigh rotation; rotates the trunk
in preparation f or forward takeoff
Concentric knee extension.  Propels the center of gr avity forward
Concentric plantar flexion.  Aids in pr opulsion
Based on B ezodis et al. (2008); Putnam and K ozey (1989); W ood (1987).
TABLE 20.1  Common Sprinting Technique Errors,
Causes, and Corrections
Error Cause Coaching recommendations
START AND ACCELERATION
Hips ar e too high in
start of cr ouch posi tion.Misunderstanding
of setupInstruct athlete to space f eet by 1.5 to 2
foot lengths, then lower into starting
position b y dropping the shin of the back
leg to be par allel with sprint surf ace.
The athlete is stepping
out later ally during the
initial driv e phase.Improper
distribution of
forcesInstruct the athlete to push or driv e
through the gr ound to ini tiate the sprint.
*See sprint dri lls 1 to 6 on pages 675-683 .
1425
Error Cause Coaching recommendations
The athlete’ s arm
movement is
abnormal ly short and
tight.Misunderstanding
of natur al arm
swingInstruct the athlete to ei ther (a) driv e the
elbow down and back or (b) pul l the hands
down and back to simulate pul ling on a
rope. I n addi tion, cue the athlete to al low
the hands to f ully break the w aist whi le also
allowing the arms to r ecover at midl ine of
the body (in visible l ine from nose thr ough
navel).
The athlete is holding
unnecessary tension in
dorsal muscles and
hyperextending the
neck.Misunderstanding
of mo vementInstruct the athlete to k eep the head in l ine
with the spine; the torso and head should
rise at the same r ate during the
acceleration and tr ansition phases of the
sprint.
The athlete jumps the
first step or steps o ver
the knee of the stance
leg.Push-of f angle too
high; upw ard
thrust too steepInstruct the athlete to ini tiate mo vement b y
driving thr ough the gr ound and al low the
swing leg to horiz ontally cut the stance leg
shin (i.e. , ankle cr ossover), rather than
stepping o ver the stance leg (i.e. , knee
crossover). In addi tion, cue the athlete to
keep the f oot of the swing leg close to the
ground to set up a pr oper ac celeration
phase.
The athlete gets into an
upright postur e
prematur ely.Inadequate push-
off force; impr oper
carriage of headInstruct the athlete to continue pushing
into the gr ound whi le maintaining a natur al
trunk lean. Also cue the athlete to k eep the
head in l ine wi th the spine; l ifting the head
may result in a sudden l ifting of the torso ,
ultimately minimizing ac celeration pat terns.
MAXIMUM VELOCITY
The athlete is
superficial ly attempting
to maintain an
acceleration phase
when the shins ar e
clearly v ertical.Improper
understanding of
movement
patternsInstruct the athlete that as the shins and
hips come up to v ertical, so should the
torso and head. Encour age the athlete to
feel for the rise in the hips so that the joints
(shoulders to hips to ankles) sta y stack ed
or in l ine. This posi tion al lows f or the
proper tr ansmission of f orces into the
running surf ace.
*See sprint dri lls 1 to 6 on pages 675-683 .
1426
Error Cause Coaching recommendations
The athlete is not
displa ying optimal
front-side mechanics
with regard to the
height of the swing leg
knee.Inadequate f orce
production and hip
mobilityRecall that the swing leg’ s knee height
(traditional ly called front-side mechanics ) is
influenced b y GRFs and hip mobi lity.
Improperly cueing an athlete to l ift the
knees ma y result in further impr oper
transmission of f orces and ul timately
change the musculatur e natur ally used
during the sprint ev ent.
The athlete is
overstriding.Misunderstanding
of force appl icationSuccess in sprint ev ents r esults from the
ability to pr oduce high v ertical f orces in a
short amount of time. An o verstriding
athlete is at tempting to incr ease speed via
larger gr ound contact times, which
ultimately dampens the ef fects of the
stretch-shortening cy cle and lowers step
frequency . Instruct athletes to run in their
lane and maintain their natur al gai t cycle.
The athlete is
displa ying chr onic
hamstring injury or
pain.Insufficient
mobility; impr oper
positioning of
pelvisA high l ikelihood of hamstring injury oc curs
during the sprint ev ent’s swing phase due
to eccentric (lengthening) f orces or
overstriding. An athlete is f urther
compr omised when displa ying anterior
pelvic ti lt during the sprint ev ent. R educe
anterior pelvic ti lt with appr opriate
development of back -side and f ront-side
mechanics thr ough appr opriate sprint
drills.*
The athlete is
attempting to cy cle the
leg action, r esulting in
an incr eased time to
complete the swing
phase. This is made
appar ent by the open
gap between the knees
during the stance
phase.Improper f orce
applicationInstruct the athlete to driv e the f oot down
and back into the tr ack, not pa w. Due to
the seemingly horiz ontal mo vement of the
foot during a sprint, coaches often miscue
athletes to pa w the f oot into the tr ack.
Pawing the f oot horiz ontally against the
track pr events the athlete f rom using
vertical f orces, o verloading the str etch-
shortening cy cle to mo ve down the tr ack.
Integration of appr opriate sprint dri lls*
should help dev elop the corr ect leg action.
The athlete is
displa ying err oneousImproper
understanding ofWhile traditional ly coaches would claim that
erratic arm mo vement is a symptom of
*See sprint dri lls 1 to 6 on pages 675-683 .
1427
Error Cause Coaching recommendations
arm mo vement in the
transverse plane.movement pat tern fatigue, much l iterature suggests that
speed is l imited by mechanical f orce
application, not metabol ic efficiency .
Therefore, athletes should emphasiz e
driving the arms down and back whi le
maintaining an upright torso . In addi tion,
strength and condi tioning pr ofessionals
should r ecommend to the athlete that the
arm swing r ecovers near the midl ine of the
body to tak e adv antage of the
glenohumer al joint ’s natur al range of
motion.
*See sprint dri lls 1 to 6 on pages 675-683 .
The following fundamental training objectiv es regarding
performance enhancement and injury prevention should be
consider ed during the dev elopment of speed in pr actical set tings:
Emphasiz e brief ground support times as a means of achieving
rapid step rate. As previously mentioned, this requires high
levels of ballistic strength. This quality is developed
systematical ly through consistent exposur e to speed training
as wel l as pr operly designed r esistance tr aining pr ograms.
Emphasiz e the further development of the SSC as a means to
increase the amplitude of impulse for each step of the sprint.
Specifically, high achiev ers at top-speed sprinting produce high
forces in a shorter stance phase using the SSC. The complete
weightl ifting movements and their derivatives are key
exercises for overloading the SSC with forces greater than
those produced during an open sprint, in addition to
plyometric training, which can induce high-impact stretch
loads to enhance S SC function and r eactiv e strength.
Because sprinting requires an athlete to move at high
speeds, stren gth and conditioning professionals should
emphasize the prescription of exercises that span the
1428
load–velocity curve while overloading musculature of
the hip, knee, and ankle regions involved in the SSC.
1429
Methods of Developing Speed
From a practical standpoint, the demonstr ation of maxim al speed is
the result of well-organized programming that organical ly develops
and matures the required skill sets within the athlete. This organic
approach to sprint training results from a schema of development
that is based on the emphasis and de-emphasis of certain qualities,
such as acceleration and maximum velocity, within each training
phase. Furthermor e, the training plan should coordinate these
singular qualities through phasic progression. A well-constructed
training plan highlights specific components that will assist in fully
maximizing an athlete’ s movement potential.
Sprinting
Although a variety of training stimul i are importan t for the
optimization of athletic performance, it can be argued that no
exercise improves running velocity more than maximu m-velocity
sprinting (i.e., primary methods). An athlete’ s sprint prowess
depends on the gener ation of high forces in short time periods (62,
105). Neurological adaptatio ns resulting from long-ter m training
plans that emphasiz e maximal strength and movement velocity
improve both RFD and impulse gener ation (1, 100). In the strength
and condi tioning setting, weightlifting movements and jump training
are prescribed to develop RFD and impulse at varying loads, because
these movements use the SSC (i.e., tertiary methods). Similarly,
upright sprint ing uses the SSC, defining it as a plyometric
movement. Chronic exposur e to movements eliciting the SSC can
increase muscle stiffness, which is a potential physiological
advantage f or sprint abi lity (39).
In addition, sprinting requires near-maximum to maximum  muscle
activation, which depends on high central nervous system activity.
Therefore, chronic exposur e to sprinting may lead to improvements
in musculosk eletal control via the central nervous system. This would
result in a cyclical dose–r esponse relationship , because
1430