# Section 20.4

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 20: Program Design and Technique for Speed and Agility Training

**Section:** 20.4 -- Agility Performance

**PDF Pages:** 1456--1480

Strength
requirementNovice
athletes
(weight room
associated)Novice
athletes
(field and
court drills)Advanced
athletes
(weight room
associated)Advanced
athletes
(field and
court drills)
braking phase of
COD and agi lityhop, and
hold)
Flywheel
resistance
training,
lower -
submaximal
eccentrics,
and tempo
trainingstrength
required
during the
catch phase of
weightl ifting-
based
exercises
Accentuated
eccentric
training
Maximal and
supramaximal
eccentrics and
resisted
eccentrics
Reactive
strength:  required
to incr ease the
ability to tr ansfer
from high ec centric
load to concentric
explosiv enessDrop landing
and landing
stabilization
exercisesBeginner
plyometrics
(slow to f ast
SSC activi ties,
bilateral to
unilateral,
sagittal to
multiplanar)Loaded jumps
Drop jumps
Complex or
contrast
trainingAdvanced
plyometrics
(fast SSC
activities,
unilateral, and
multiplanar
plyometrics)
Multidirectional
strength:  required
to hold body
position str ongly
during mul titude of
movement
demandsLunges,
landmine
skater squatsLow-velocity
COD (e.g. ,
Z-drill)
Lateral,
backw ard,
and forward
COD dri llsUnilateral
exercises
Greater
degree of
freedom
exercises
(e.g.,
landmine
exercises)High-
velocity
COD dri lls
Challenging
cutting-
angle COD
drills
Perceptual-
cognitive
abilities:  required— Simple r eaction
drills:
introduction to— Small-sided
games
Note: COD = change of dir ection.
Adapted by permission from S. Nimphius, “Increasing Agility,” in High-P erformance Training
for Sports , edited by D. Joyce and D . Lewindon (Human Kinetics, 2014), 194 .
1456
Strength
requirementNovice
athletes
(weight room
associated)Novice
athletes
(field and
court drills)Advanced
athletes
(weight room
associated)Advanced
athletes
(field and
court drills)
to progress in
visual scanning,
effective
anticipation, and
decision makingincreasing
either tempor al
or spatial
uncertaint yAgility drills
with
severely
restricted
tempor al
and spatial
aspects
Virtual
reality and
video-based
training
Note: COD = change of dir ection.
Adapted by permission from S. Nimphius, “Increasing Agility,” in High-P erformance Training
for Sports , edited by D. Joyce and D . Lewindon (Human Kinetics, 2014), 194 .
Change-of-Direction Ability
Similar to the progressions of plyometric activities based on intensi ty
and difficulty of each drill, closed-ski ll COD drills can progress from
beginner to intermediate to advanced levels based on the physical
loading demands that have been discussed in this chapter
(regulation of angle and intensi ty, which affect mechanical loading)
(36). Table 20.5 presents an example of a progression of drills for
COD ability (both rapid COD and those associated with
maneuv erability), as well as a progression plan for agility drills. The
physical loading during agility drills will be higher than beginner COD
drills. Therefore, table 20.5 provides practitioners with a series of
drills and a guidel ine for safely and effectively advancing athletes so
they can build on their physical and technical attributes as they
improve.
TABLE 20.5  Change-of-Direction and Agility Drill
Progressions
1457
Agility
component Beginner Intermediate Advanced
COD Deceler ation
drills (forward)
progressing to
higher entry
velocity or
shorter distance
to stop
Basic mo vement
patterns f or
forward,
backw ard, and
lateral shuf fling
COD dri lls that
involve low
velocities (less
than 5 y d [5 m]
of acceleration
into COD)— Z-
drill, for
exampleDeceler ation dri lls
(lateral) wi th same
progressions as f orward
Expand to include a
broad range of cut ting
angles less than 75
degrees
May incr ease entry
velocity during dri lls (up
to 10 y d [9 m] of
acceleration leading into
COD)Deceler ation to
reacceleration in
both f orward and
lateral directions
Expand f urther to a
compr ehensiv e
range of cut ting
angles, including
those gr eater than
75 degr ees
Maximal-ef fort
deceler ations and
entry v elocities
Maneuv erabilityBasic dri lls or tests
such as the Il linois
agility that r equire
nearly str aight-line
running wi th slight
bendsDrills that incr ease the
difficulty of the bend
involved such as the L -
run
Drills that r equire
transition between
modes of mo vement
(shuffling, sprinting, and
backpedal ing) such as
the T-testRepeated
maneuv erability
activities wi th
manipulated work -to-
rest ratios
Agility Physical and
technical
competence should
occur bef ore agility
drills are
incorpor atedCOD dri lls in beginner
and intermediate
categories wi th the
addition of simple stimul i
(arrow, pointing in a
certain dir ection)Expand into lar ge
degrees of spatial
and tempor al
uncertaint y (and
therefore greater
perceptual-
cogni tive stress)
Note: COD = change of dir ection.
Adapted by permission from S. Nimphiu s, “Increasing Agility,” in High-P erformance Training
for Sports , edited by D. Joyce and D . Lewindon (Human Kinetics, 2014), 194 .
1458
Agility
component Beginner Intermediate Advanced
These dri lls present a
limited number of
options f or the athlete to
have to r eact to (e.g. ,
right or left, f orward or
back) on the signal and
do not dev elop agi lity
per se; howev er, they
further incr ease intensi ty
of drills along the agi lity
development continuum.Small-sided games
Evasion games and
drills
Note: COD = change of dir ection.
Adapted by permission from S. Nimphiu s, “Increasing Agility,” in High-P erformance Training
for Sports , edited by D. Joyce and D . Lewindon (Human Kinetics, 2014), 194 .
Perceptual-Cognitive Ability
During years of skills training  (within the sport), athletes continual ly
enhance visual scanning, pattern recogni tion, and knowledge of the
situation, while in drills used to improve agility (outside of skills
practice) they primari ly focus on improving anticipation , decision-
making time, and accuracy. In the same way one would regularly
increase the demands of a physical task to continual ly improve
performance, one can train perceptual-cogni tive ability. Therefore,
agility activities should begin by adding a perceptual-cognitive
component (i.e., progressing from low to high cogni tive loading) to
common closed-ski ll COD drills. For example, deceler ations or the Z-
drill can evolve into agility drills by including a generic stimulus such
as a whistle, a voice command, or a flashing arrow or light (87, 110).
Following success with the aforementioned agility drills, progression
requires activities that have sport-speci fic stimul i such as evasive
drills and small-sided games , which have been said to have better
transfer to performance (87, 110). Both generic and specific stimul i
can be made more difficult within a given agility drill through
progressive increases in either tempor al (time) or spatia l (space or
1459
area) stress on the athlete.  See table 20.6 for a range of agility
factors that can be manipulated in agi lity drill design.
TABLE 20.6  Mechanical and Perceptual-Cognitive
Factors That Can Be Manipulated During Agility Drills
Variable Factor Interpretation
Mechanical Spacing and
pitch or court
dimensionsAltering the space and pi tch or court dimensions wi ll vary
the distances tr aveled and subsequent entry and exi t
velocities and momentum achiev ed, and ther efore allow
athletes to dev elop agi lity from lower v elocity, intensiv e
scenarios, to higher v elocity, extensiv e scenarios.
Additional ly, entry v elocity regulates intensi ty and
subsequent mechanical loading experienced.Entry and exi t
velocity
momentum
Agility actions
and angle of
CODPractitioners can put r estrictions on the t ype of COD
action perf ormed or al low athletes to try a r ange of
different COD actions to dev elop between-ski ll variabi lity
and mo vement solutions. Addi tional ly, varying the
location of end or tar get zones can al low athletes to
develop shal low, moder ate, and sharp COD abi lity to
enable them to be pr oficient in changing dir ection acr oss
a spectrum of angles.
Starting posi tion
(static or
transitional
movements)Athletes can begin the dri ll from di fferent static ini tiation
(e.g., drop step , jab step) and f rom di fferent tr ansitional
movements (i.e. , backpedal, cr ossover running, later al
shuffle) to cr eate dri ll variabi lity and to incr ease game
representativ eness and abi lity to ev ade or def end from
different locomotor actions.
Perceptual-
cogni tiveLocation and
number of
attackers or
defendersThe location of the def enders and at tackers can be
manipulated. F or example, in addi tion to f ront-on
situations, def enders can be located to the side or behind
the at tackers. This is pertinent f or 360-degr ee sports in
which def enders and at tackers can be located in v arious
locations on the pi tch or court. The addi tion of mul tiple
attackers and def enders can incr ease game
representativ eness, al lowing the opportuni ty for deco y
runs; at tacking and def ensive transitions and set pla ys;
team communication; and incr eased chaos, task
complexi ty, cogni tive loading, and v ariabi lity.
Note:  COD = change of
direction.
1460
Variable Factor Interpretation
Tempor al
constr aintsTempor al or time constr aints can be administer ed (i.e. ,
athlete has 5 s to achiev e the objectiv e) to maintain
quality and intensi ty (and often to r eplicate the r educed
tempor al constr aints associated in r andom sports). W ork-
to-rest ratios can be manipulated f or ener gy system
development and to r epresent peak demands of sports.
Rules and
condi tionsPractitioners can be cr eative and v ary the rules (i.e. , one-
hand or two-hand tags) and put constr aints on the
attackers or def enders to cr eate v ariation (i.e. , only two
evasive actions can be perf ormed bef ore commi tting to a
specific dir ection wi thin the dri ll).
Environment and
surfacesTo incr ease game r epresentativ eness, dri lls should be
performed on the sport -speci fic surf ace. Howev er, certain
sports ma y play on di fferent surf aces (i.e. , grass and
artificial turf ) with different har dness and f rictional
properties, and thus these should be consider ed.
Generic to sport -
specific stimulus
(developing
representativ e
learning
environments)Generic stimul i and sour ces of inf ormation can be used
such as audi tory commands, generic visual commands,
and stimul i such as flashing l ights, arr ows, and coach- or
player-dictated dir ectional commands to incr ease
cogni tive loading and incr ease mechanical loading in a
controlled en vironment. T ypical ly, the timing of stimul i
can be contr olled as wel l using speci fic equipment.
Howev er, to incr ease game r epresentativ eness, dev elop
perceptual-cogni tive speed, knowledge of si tuations,
memory r ecall, and anticipation, sport -speci fic stimul i
(i.e., multiple at tackers or def enders, inclusion of sport -
specific implements and scenarios) can be included to
develop mo vement solutions and tr ansfer to sporting
performance. These dri lls can be dev eloped
collaboratively wi th the ski lls coach f or simul taneous
technical and tactical dev elopment.
Task complexi ty
and cogni tive
loadingTo chal lenge mor e adv anced athletes and to ensur e
athletes ar e prepared for the chaotic demands of sport
when r eturning to sports, dri lls can begin wi th relatively
simple closed and open dri lls with one or two stimul i and
sources of inf ormation, bef ore progressing to mor e
chaotic open dri lls of incr eased game r epresentativ eness
with various sour ces of stimul i and inf ormation (i.e. ,
Note:  COD = change of
direction.
1461
Variable Factor Interpretation
multiple at tackers or def enders, inclusion of sport -speci fic
implements and stimul i can be included).
Note:  COD = change of
direction.
1462
Program Design
Program design  involves planning at several levels, each with its own
set of consider ations: microcycles (short term), mesocy cles (medium
term), and macrocycles (long term). The process is referred to as
periodization . Periodization  is the strategic manipulation of an
athlete’ s preparedness through the emplo yment of sequenced
training phase s defined by cycles and stages of workload (see
chapter 22). These planned workloads are varied to facilitate the
integr ation of planned programming tactics that will harmoniz e the
relationship between training-induced fatigue and accommodation
(30). Furthermor e, the periodization process is guided by
information collected during the athlete monitoring process.
Specifically, as an athlete progresses through a training phase,
consistent information acquir ed through various monitoring
strategies helps to show how the athlete is responding to the
training stimulus in the short term and how the athlete  should be
further developed in the long term—that is, how the original training
program should be modi fied to r eflect r esponses to the tr aining.
At each level of training plan development, strength and
condi tioning professionals must manipulate certain variables. While
these are useful in characterizing the training agenda as well as
quanti fying workloads, strength and condi tioning professionals
should keep in mind that each variable must be consider ed
individual ly, and they should regard how it affects the collective
system. Moreover, individual athlete training responses, which
athlete monitoring reveals, should be used in the manipulation of
these v ariables:
Angle —The intended angle for COM deflection during the task
and a r egulator f or knee joint loading
Approach velocity—The horizontal entry velocity of the COM as
the athlete begins to initiate their COD action over multiple
steps and a r egulator f or knee joint loading
1463
Exercise (or work) interv al—The duration or distance over
which a r epetition is ex ecuted
Exercise order—The sequenc e in which a set of repetitions is
executed
Frequency —The number of training sessions performed in a
given time period (e.g. , day or week)
Intensi ty—The effort with which a repetition is executed (% of
maximum)
Recovery (rest) interv al—The time period between repetitions
and sets
Repetition—The execution of a specific workload assignment
or mo vement technique
Series—A group of sets and r ecovery interv als
Set—A group of r epetitions and r est interv als
Volume-load —The density of volume performed at prescribed
intensi ties—f or example, 3 sets of 5 repetitions at 100
kilograms r esults in a v olume-load of 1,500 ki lograms
Volume —The amount of work (e.g., 3 sets of 5 repetitions)
performed in a giv en training session or time period
Work-to-rest ratio—The relative density of exercise and relief
interv als in a set, expr essed as a r atio
Chapter 22 explains periodization of resistance training programs,
and the same concepts can be applied to sprint, COD, and agility
training.
1464
Speed Development Strategies
The planning process for speed development is similar to that used
by strength and condi tioning professionals in the weight room.
Specifically, planning tactics should be periodiz ed in a manner that
addresses the physical and psychological components of sprinting
through emphasis and de-emphasis on particular qualities in a
phasic manner . An athlete’ s capabi lity to sprint can be improved
through the incorpor ation of training periods that are designed to
fully maximize and saturate a fitness quality, which may bolster the
effects of f uture training agendas.
To enhance speed, a practitioner should consider the relationship
between human locomotion and force production. Throughout this
chapter the authors have pointed to a link between sprint success
and certain physiological phenomena. Elite sprinters produce large
amounts of force within a short amount of time. This high level of
force allows the sprinter to produce longer step lengths at a faster
rate. This displa y of movement on the track reflects enhanced
neuromuscular factors—namely , maximal strength, RFD, and
impulse. These variables are the product of well-designed training
protocols that aim to enhance qualities such as the hypertr ophy of
task-speci fic motor units, firing frequency , rate coding, and muscle–
tendon sti ffness.
An option for speed development is provided in table 20.7,
demonstr ating how sequenced phases of training may seamlessly
develop sprint  potential through the matur ation of accelerative
abilities before the execution of maximal- velocity efforts. This model,
which can be referred to as a short to long method  of sprint training,
is a conceptua l progression that attempts to merge the relationship
between larger rates of acceleration and greater sprint velocities
(discussed earlier in this chapter) (31). Specifically, an athlete taking
part in a short to long model will begin the training year with an
emphasis on improving propulsiv e force output through short sprints
that maintain the biomecha nics associated with the acceleration
1465
phase of a sprint. Later, the athlete bridges into longer sprint work
that aims to enhance top speed through upright running mechanics.
The concept behind this proposed model is that an athlet e may see
greater improvements in top speed if force production can occur at
the ideal rate and moment through an investment in acceleration
development and optimization (62). An alternativ e approach for
track sprinters (100-200 m) may involve sequencing training from
gener al to specific preparation starting with an aerobic foundation to
developing anaerobic capaci ty (short speed–endur ance), to speed–
endur ance (long speed–endu rance) culminating in speed  (inclusiv e
of acceleration and maximum velocity) before the main competi tion
(14, 46).
TABLE 20.7  Application of Speed Development
Strategies: Phasic Development for Short-Distance
Sprinting (e.g., 100 m sprinter; bobsled athlete)
Block and
emphasis Training tool and notesLoad prescription
(rest periods
between sets) for an
example microcycle
within each blocka
Block 1
Primary aim:
Acceleration
development1. Use incl ine sprinting to dev elop pr oper
acceleration mechanics, pr oviding an
opportuni ty to maximiz e propulsion f orces
in the ini tial stages of a sprint.
2. Emphasiz e low heel r ecovery; driving the
foot down and thr ough the gr ound;
aggressive and complete arm action;
neutral head posi tion in l ine wi th the
spine. R esisted ac celeration bounds could
be incorpor ated to emphasiz e lower l imb
extension and f orceful thigh r etraction
during late swing.Monday:
Incline sprints
1 × 3 × 15 m (1.5
min)
1 × 4 × 20 m (2 min)
Wednesday:
Resisted or sled
acceleration bounds (2
min)
1 × 4 × 15 m
1 × 2 × 20 m (2 min)
Friday:
Incline sprints
1 × 2 × 15 m (1.5
min)
1 × 3 × 20 m (2 min)
1466
Block and
emphasis Training tool and notesLoad prescription
(rest periods
between sets) for an
example microcycle
within each blocka
1 × 2 × 25 m (2.5
min)
Block 2
Primary aim:  Long
acceleration
development
Secondary aim:
Improve transition
to upright sprinting1. Introduce flat -ground sprinting f rom a
low starting posi tion or towing
mechanism.
2. Promote the corr ect biomechanics of
transition sprinting f rom ac celeration to
maximal v elocity through the inclusion of
acceleration holds.bMonday:
Incline sprints
1 × 3 × 30 m (3 min)
1 × 3 × 40 m (4 min)
Wednesday:
Push-up starts
1 × 4 × 15 m (2 min)
Sled tows
2 × 3 × 20 m (2 min
/4 min)
Friday:
Crouch starts
1 × 4 × 15 m (2 min)
Acceleration holds
1 × 3 × 40 m (4 min)
Block 3
Primary aim:
Introduction to max
speed tr aining
Secondary aim:
Maintain
accelerative ability
Tertiary aim:
Exposur e to speed–
endur ance;
introduction to
special endur ance1. Maintain ac celeration abi lities thr ough
inclusion of short sprints at the beginning
of most sessions.
2. Begin exposur e to maximum speed
training thr ough ex ercises that use
upright sprinting mechanics.
3. Prescribe speed–endur ance or special
endur ance sessions later in the week
when ef fects of summated f atigue ma y
dampen neur al driv e.Monday:
Block starts
1 × 2 × 20 m (2.5
min)
1 × 2 × 30 m (3.5
min)
Accelerations f rom
crouch stance
1 × 3 × 40 m (5 min)
Wednesday:
High-stance starts
1 × 3 × 20 m (2.5
min)
Fly-ins
1 × 4 × 20 m bui ld/20
m fly (4 min)
Friday:
Block starts
1 × 4 × 20 m (3 min)
1467
Block and
emphasis Training tool and notesLoad prescription
(rest periods
between sets) for an
example microcycle
within each blocka
Accelerations f rom
crouch stance
1 × 2 × 40 m (5 min)
Speed–endur ance f rom
two-point stance
1 × 2 × 60 m (5.5
min)
Block 4
Primary aim:
Enhance maximal
speed abi lity
Secondary aim:
Maintain
accelerative ability
Tertiary aim:
Continued
exposur e to speed–
endur ance and
special endur ance1. Continue exposur e to maximum speed
training thr ough longer fly -in zones or
race-model ing pr actices.
2. Maintain ac celeration abi lities thr ough
incorpor ation of short sprints at the
beginning of most sessions.
3. Prescribe speed–endur ance or special
endur ance sessions r elevant to the
athlete’ s primary ev ents.Monday:
Block starts
1 × 2 × 30 m (3.5
min)
Acceleration holds
1 × 2 × 40 m (5 min)
Fly-float-fly
1 × 4 × 20/20/20 (7
min)
Wednesday
(technical session):
Ankling 2 × 15 m (1
min)
A-skip 2 × 20 m (1
min)
Ankle dribble 1 × 20 m
(1 min)
Calf dribble 1 × 20 m
(1 min)
Knee dribble 1 × 20 m
(1 min)
Dribble bleed 1 × 30 m
Straight-leg bound 2 ×
20 m (2 min)
Wicketc 2 × 30 m (3
min)
Wicket with run-of f 2 ×
30 m + 15 m (4 min)
Dribble blend 2 × 2 ×
40 m (5 min)
1468
Block and
emphasis Training tool and notesLoad prescription
(rest periods
between sets) for an
example microcycle
within each blocka
Friday:
Block starts 1 × 3 × 25
m (3 min)
Speed–endur ance f rom
two-point stance 1 × 2
× 50 m (6 min)
1 × 2 × 70 m (6.5
min)
1 × 2 × 90 m (7 min)
aEach session should be preceded by a warm-up that incorpor ates a range of technical
drills to work on aspects of technique in relation to both acceleration and maximum-
velocity sprinting (see sprint drills 1 to 6 on pages 675-683  for exam ples). These drills
could also f orm dedicated technique sessions as depicted in block 4 of the table.
bAn acceleration hold is a sprint drill for which the strength and condi tioning professional
places a cone on the track near or slightly before the point at which an athlete’ s shin
typical ly rises to a vertical position, which is indicativ e of upright sprinting. The athlete is
then instructed to maintain the speed achiev ed up to the cone through the remainder of
the sprint. For instance, an athlete may be prescribed acceleration holds for 40 meters, but
the coach’s mark ending the acceleration zone is placed at the 20-meter mark on the track.
The athlete then maintains that speed from 20 meters to 40 meters. This drill is used to
begin to f ocus on impr oving tr ansitional mechanics.
cWickets are a constr ained sprinting task that involves a period of sprint running whereby
the athlete appears to step over objects (e.g., mini-hur dles) in an effort to encour age high
foot recovery and optimal f ront-side mechanics.
Biomechanical Differences in A cceleration
Between S print and Team-Sport Athletes
The ability to accelerate linearly and displace the COM rapidly is essential in track
sprinting and multidirectional team sports. Track sprinters are the fastest humans
on earth, and thus examining the biomechanics and techniques they adopt is
intuitive to better understand and optim ize sprinting performance in athletes. Clear
biomechanical and technical differences exist between sprint and team-sport
athletes (25, 107); howev er, it is impor tant to consider that environment, task, and
performer constr aints will all interact and influence the acceleration strategy and
mechanics emplo yed and the o verall execution of the sprinting ski ll.
1469
Wild and colleagues (107) examined the first three steps during initial
acceleration and observ ed that sprinters achiev ed greater step velocities and
greater normal ized average horizontal external power , and they displa yed greater
normal ized step length and flight length, greater normal ized touchdown distance
(i.e., foot impact under or behind COM), and greater toe-of f distance (i.e., effective
push-of f behind COM) compar ed to rugby forwards and backs. Conversely , rugby
backs displayed slightly shorter contact times and slightly greater step rates
compar ed to sprinters. From a kinetics perspectiv e for later acceleration at
matched velocities (step 8-12 for sprinters and 9-20 for soccer), while no
differences were observ ed in the initial 20% of the stance phase between sprinters
and soccer athletes, sprinters produced greater anterior –posterior force across
most of the propulsiv e phase and greater net forces over similar contact times,
thus resulting in greater relative net impulse (25). As such, the sprinters achiev ed
greater average horizontal external power , which allowed them to accelerate
beyond the v elocity plateau of the soc cer athletes.
It should be noted  that the spatiotem poral, kinematic, and kinetic differences
observ ed could be partial ly attributed to sprinters accelerating from a four-point
position using blocks and performed on a rubber surface while wearing spikes. This
results in different body segment orientations such as greater forward trunk lean
and horizontal shin angles, which contribute to more horizontally orientated force
(107). Conversely , team-sport athletes  initiate their sprints from a more upright,
two-point stagger ed-stance position (resulting in a more vertical ly orientated
force), on a different surface with less favorable frictional properties for achieving
peak speed (i.e., grass, field turf, indoor courts), and with different footwear that is
designed for multidirectional and sport-speci fic movements (e.g., cleats or
trainers). Additional ly, sprinters’ preparation strategies are designed around the
sole task of maxim izing linear speed, which is the aim of that sport, and an
isolated event. As such, sprinting is a skill, and thus, sprinters can dedicate more
time and deliberate practice to developing the skill of sprinting, while their
periodiz ed strength  and condi tioning programs can also be tailored to maximiz e
the physical qualities that underpin linear sprinting. Conversely , team-sport
athletes must be proficient at a range of multidirectional movements (i.e.,
changing direction,  curved sprints of varying radii and direction, compar ed to
sprinters who perform curved sprints anticlockwise with radii ≥40 yd [36.5 m], and
deceler ation) and sport-speci fic skills (e.g., passing, tackling, shooting).
Additional ly, team-s port athletes must perform technical and tactical training and
gener ally must do so repeatedly over the course of long matches (generally
ranging 40-90 mins) and competi tive seasons. Due to these competing demands,
team-sport athletes  must spend a significantly lower proportion of time developing
sprinting skills, while their preparation programs also differ due to the different
physical, biomechanical, and car diorespiratory fi tness demands between sports.
1470
Monitoring Sprint Ability
The longstandi ng method of assessing an athlete’ s speed ability has
typical ly involved a test of maximal-ef fort linear sprinting . Much of
the time, the maximal-ef fort sprint test is carried out over a
distance, such as 40 yards (37 m), that is believed to be relevant to
the athlete’ s sport. While time to completion is an effective tool to
evaluate chang es in sprint performance, these tests do not fully
address the minute changes regarding an athlete’ s progression
toward race or field readines s. In addition, testing error in the form
of hand timing and various start tactics confound the interpretation
of testing r esults. As a r esult, strength and condi tioning pr ofessionals
may consider the adoption of additional monitoring tools as part of
their bat tery of assessments.
One such method of evaluation comes from the assistance of
high-speed camer as or optical timing systems that use interruptions
of infrared light to captur e data from an athlete’ s collective foot
strike (15). This technology provides strength and conditioning
professionals with additional insight into the sprint capabi lities of the
athlete, such as technique and movement strategies (16).
Additional ly, technology that permi ts the quanti fication of
instantaneous speed is also advantageous for insights into speed at
specific distances, time to achiev e specific speeds, peak speed,
acceleration, and τ (acceleration time constant). Table 20.8 provides
a description of key variables that may be beneficial in the
monitoring of speed dev elopment.
TABLE 20.8  Monitoring Speed Development
Measure Description Interpretation
Ground
contact timeThe total time al lotted for a
single stance phase.In gener al, decr eased gr ound contact
times coupled wi th impr oved sprint
completion times ma y suggest that an
athlete has impr oved the abi lity to
gener ate high r ates of f orce in a shorter
Note:  ETG = electronic timing gate; 2D = two-dimensional; 3D = three-dimensional ; LiDAR
= light detection and r anging.
1471
Measure Description Interpretation
amount of time. Howev er, an athlete ma y
demonstr ate sl ightly longer gr ound
contact times at the ini tial stages of the
sprint due to ac celeration mechanics.
Step length The distance between the toe
and heel of two consecutiv e
footsteps. Example: centimeters
between the heel of the right
foot and the heel of the left
foot.Improvements in step length (incr eases
in distance co vered) ma y occur thr ough
improved sprint mechanics or postur e
and ul timately enhanced f orce output.
Stride
lengthThe distance between the heel
in two consecutiv e steps of the
same f oot. Example: meters
between the heel of the right
foot and the heel of the next
ground contact made b y the
right f oot.Improvements in stride length (incr eases
in distance co vered by two suc cessiv e
steps) ma y occur thr ough impr oved sprint
mechanics or postur e, and ul timately
enhanced f orce output.
Flight time The dur ation of time that an
athlete is not in contact wi th the
ground. This oc curs between
the end of one step and the
beginning of the subsequent
step.Increases in fl ight time can be interpr eted
in two w ays:
An athlete is pr oducing higher v ertical
forces over a shorter amount of time,
resulting in optimal horiz ontal
displacement of the athlete’ s mass
down the tr ack.
An athlete is pr oducing higher f orces
over a longer amount of time, which
may result in unnecessary v ertical
amplitude of the center of mass.
Stride angle The angle at which the f oot
leaves the tr ack.The angle of stride ma y provide the
strength and condi tioning pr ofessional
with the abi lity to determine i f the athlete
is producing f orces at the right moment,
which is achiev ed thr ough pr oper sprint
mechanics. Furthermor e, data on the
stride angle elucidate what stage of sprint
the athlete is at taining (ac celeratory,
transitory, maximum speed) and ma y
relate to gr ound contact times.
Note:  ETG = electronic timing gate; 2D = two-dimensional; 3D = three-dimensional ; LiDAR
= light detection and r anging.
1472
Measure Description Interpretation
Speed The relationship between steps
and the sum of the first step’ s
ground contact time and the
flight time leading to the
subsequent gr ound contact.
Alternativ ely, instantaneous
speed or v elocity can be
examined using GPS technology ,
LiDAR, laser , radar, motoriz ed
resistance devices, and 2D and
3D motion captur e.Speed dictates how f ast an athlete can
move the body mass o ver a speci fic
distance.
Instantaneous speed/v elocity at time
points/distances can be calculated,
facilitating a gr eater insight into sprint
strategy
Acceleration The change in speed as
determined b y the del ta of two
steps (e.g. , right heel to left
heel) and the sum of gr ound
contact times and fl ight times of
each step .Acceleration pr ovides insight into how
well the athlete changes speed
(increasing v elocity in a dir ection) o ver a
prescribed distance. F or most athletes,
furthering the length an athlete can
accelerate wi ll lead to higher top speed,
provided that postur al integri ty and
mechanics ar e sound.
Technique Acceleration and maximum
velocity techniques can be
objectiv ely quanti fied (i.e. , joint
angles) or qual itatively
examined and compar ed to
technical models to help
improve perf ormance and
mitigate injury risk.Qualitative analysis is r elatively simple to
perform and only r equires filming of
sprint technique. High-speed video
recording is a common f eature of most
smartphones and tablets, and athletes’
technique can be compar ed to technical
models such as Al tis Kinogr am or Sprint -
Mechanics assessment scor e (16) to help
individual ize training.
Note:  ETG = electronic timing gate; 2D = two-dimensional; 3D = three-dimensional ; LiDAR
= light detection and r anging.
1473
Agility Development Strategies
The development of agility is best achiev ed using a periodiz ed
programming method. Random programming or the development of
agility using only sport-speci fic methods such as small-sided games
has not been found to be as effective (13). Although agility is a
constant element on the field of play or during skills practices, it is
recommended that agility development begin with the use of COD
drills (preplann ed) and progress in difficulty through increases in the
physical deman ds; this is followed by the addition of drills involving
perceptual-cogni tive stress or what are typical ly termed agility drills
(60, 110). In line with this recommendation, the development of
agility should start with a needs analysis based on assessment of the
athlete’ s COD ability and agility. The agility test should specifically
evaluate perceptual-cogni tive ability, as previously described in table
20.3 on page 655. Further , depending on the additional movement
requirements of the sport, one may also choose to use a test that is
more dependent on maneuv erability.
The following is an example of steps for determining the
appropriate tests, analyzing the results, and using them to program
agility development of an athlete. Because agility performance is
underpinned by multiple factors, one should target the largest
window of opportuni ty through direct assessment of the strengths
and weaknesses of the athlete.
Step 1. Perform a needs analysis of the sport and match tests
appropriately to assess these qual ities (table 20.9 ).
Step 2. Determine strengths and weaknesses by comparing results
as a standar dized score to performance standar ds or team mean
(figure 20.13 ).
Step 3. Plan the development of a primary area of need and a
secondary ar ea of need f or the athlete.
Step 4. Distribute the time available for this development based on
need identi fication.
1474
Step 5. Provide a preliminary plan for transition of percent
distribution through the training blocks (table 20.10 ). Determine if
this progression is appropriate by monitoring the development of
COD and agi lity as described in table 20.8  (e.g., COD defici t).
TABLE 20.9  Needs Analysis for Agility Development
Sport Basketball
Timeframe 12 weeks (8 weeks of f-season and 4 weeks pr eseason
training)
Sport-specific agility
needs analysisHigh- velocity COD
Backdoor cuts, cuts thr ough the lane, f ast br eak, and
possession changes
Maneuv erability (mul tiple modes of COD mo vement)
Defensive shuf fling, backpedal ing, and bending changes
of direction ar ound scr eens to lose def ender
Agility (per ceptual-cogni tive)
Decision-making time (pr ovides gr eat adv antages both
offensively and def ensively)
Ability to mo ve in reaction to pla y or opponent
Recommended tests 5-0-5 including COD , T-test, agi lity test (decision time
measur ed)
Note:  COD = change of dir ection.
1475
FIGURE 20.13  Strengths and weaknesses of an athlete through representation of
standar dized scores for perceptual-cogni tive ability, maneuv erability, and COD ability.
Negativ e values indicate performance lower than average, whereas positive values indicate
performance bet ter than a verage.
With the information provided by the testing as well as
considering other physical fitness capaci ties, one can implement an
appropriate periodiz ed plan. Table 20.11 shows an example of three
blocks of training (four weeks each). The length of time for a
training session  is between 10 and 15 minutes inclusiv e of work and
rest time and can be completed one to three times per week
depending on additional requirements of the athletes (e.g., skills
training increasing in the preseason). A variety of drills can replace
the examples given here; howev er, they should be chosen based on
their classi fication and abi lity to addr ess the athlete’ s needs.
TABLE 20.10  Planned Distribution of Training Blocks
for Agility Development
COD ManeuverabilityAgility (perceptual-
cognitive)
PRIMARY AIM SECONDARY AIM TERTIARY AIM
Estimated %
time al lottedBlock 1 ~65%
Block 2 ~60%Block 1 ~35%
Block 2 ~30%Block 1 N/A
Block 2 ~20%
1476
COD ManeuverabilityAgility (perceptual-
cognitive)
through
blocksBlock 3 ~50% Block 3 ~25% Block 3 ~25%
Additional
commentsCheck str ength or
specifically load
absorption abi lity
with drop
landings.Assess body
positioning during
lateral shuf fling and
COD.May be r eliant on per ceptual-
cogni tive ability. This ma y
have previously mask ed the
identi fication that the athlete
could impr ove his or her
physical COD abi lity.
TABLE 20.11  Application of Agility Development
Strategies
Block and emphasis Training tools and notes Load prescription for week 1
Block 1
Primary aim:  COD
(deceler ation capaci ty
—linear)
Secondary aim:
Maneuv erability (body
position)Braking tasks ar e eccentric
focused; ther efore, start
with low v olumes simi lar to
those used to intr oduce
eccentric tasks
(plyometrics).
Focus on the athlete
staying low; sacri fice speed
for posi tioning, and
emphasiz e optimal
deceler ation mechanics.2-3 sessions per week; r est period
between sets
COD Dri ll
Deceler ations* (5 y d [5 m]
start-stop) 1 × 6 (30 s)
(Alternate nonpr eferred,
preferred leg finish br aking
[split stance] posi tion and
bilateral athletic r eady
position.)
Maneuv erability Drill
Lateral shuf fling @ height or
backpedal ing 1 × 4 × 11 y d
[10 m] (30 s)
Block 2
Primary aim:  COD
(deceler ation capaci ty
—later al)
Secondary aim:
Maneuv erabilityEnsur e that the athlete can
use body posi tion to
effectively br ake when
oriented both f orward and
laterally; focus on the
athlete absorbing into stop .2-3 sessions per week; r est
periods between sets
COD Dri ll
Deceler ations* (11 y d [10 m]
start-stop) 1 × 6 (30 s) as wi th
week 1; use same v ariations
Note:  COD = change of dir ection.
*Speed should progressively increase for deceler ation drills through the weeks—f or
example, half speed to three-quarters  speed entry velocity or changing distance of start-
stop dri lls inclusiv e of generic and sport -speci fic stimul i.
Note:  There is not a separ ate emphasis on acceleration ability here; it is expected this will
be addr essed in conjunction wi th speed sessions.
1477
Block and emphasis Training tools and notes Load prescription for week 1
(transition between
modes of COD—
shuffle to sprint to
shuffle)Expand to a single ef fort in
reaction to generic
stimulus.
Promote ef fective
application of f orce into the
ground (“pushing the
ground a way”); w atch
shank angle and trunk
position for visual
feedback.Deceler ations (later al) 1 × 4
(30 s)
Maneuv erability Drill
Z-drill (forward) 2 × 4 (30 s; 2
min) (Alw ays alternate start
direction: left to right vs. right
to left dir ection)
Y-drill using di fferent cut ting
maneuv ers; side-step ,
crossover, or spl it-step to
develop mo vement solutions.
Ensur e exit out of dir ectional
change is completed into a
rapid deceler ation. 3 × 4 (1
min; 3 min) (Generic stimul i
could be added later wi thin the
block)
Block 3
Primary aim:  COD
(effective deceler ation
to reacceleration)
Secondary aim:
Maneuv erability
(combine ef fective
transition and body
positioning)
Tertiary aim:  Agility
(focus on k eeping
COD perf ormance and
body posi tion ev en in
response to a generic
stimulus)Focus on “br aking in” and
“exploding out ” of the
COD.
Focus on f ootwork and
keeping low , with steps
that pr omote a “dr op and
drive” out of the COD .
This is used to check the
transfer of ph ysical tr aining
to a mor e speci fic (yet still
generic) stimulus. F ocus on
the “decide and go ,”
checking f or athletes to
reorient ef fectively or to
move as ef fectively as they
decide.1-2 sessions per week (depending
on ski lls volume); r est period
between sets
COD Dri ll
Modified 5-0-5 dri ll 2 × 4 (30
s; 2 min) (Al ternate plant f oot)
Maneuv erability Drill
T-test 1 × 4 (30 s)
Agility
Reactiv e agility (Y agi lity drill) 1
× 4 (30 s) (Same dir ection in
response to pointing in a
direction)
Skills training wi ll also
inherently contain sport -
specific stimulus tr aining
Note:  COD = change of dir ection.
*Speed should progressively increase for deceler ation drills through the weeks—f or
example, half speed to three-quarters  speed entry velocity or changing distance of start-
stop dri lls inclusiv e of generic and sport -speci fic stimul i.
Note:  There is not a separ ate emphasis on acceleration ability here; it is expected this will
be addr essed in conjunction wi th speed sessions.
1478
Monitoring Agility and Change-of-
Direction Ability
In line with the concepts consider ed in monitoring sprint
performance, simply assessing performance modification in either
COD or agility according to time to completion of the chosen test
does not isolate the physical quality or perceptual-cogni tive quality
that one is trying to examine—the actual ability to change direction
(70, 71, 73, 92, 96). Therefore, when monitoring COD or agility
performance, the strength and condi tioning professional may
consider the measur es in table 20.12 . Although these  aspects of
performance have been measur ed using expensiv e devices such as
three-dimensional motion analysis equipment, readily available high-
speed cameras (collecting more than 100 frames per second) could
easily be used in conjunction with the usual timing methods (hand
or electr onic).
TABLE 20.12  Monitoring Agility Development
Measure Description Interpretation
Completion
timeTotal time to complete the task Represents the dur ation i t takes the
athlete to get f rom A to B but can be
biased tow ard athletes wi th superior
linear speed; pr ovides l imited
information r egarding COD abi lity,
technique, or str ategy . Can be simply
assessed using a stopw atch or ET Gs.
COD defici t The di fference in time between
a straight-line sprint and a
COD test of equal lengthAssessing the COD defici t provides
insight into the addi tional amount of
time r equired by the athlete due to the
demands of COD . An example is
subtraction of 10 m sprint time f rom 5-0-
5 COD time (a common COD test is 10 m
in length). Howev er, COD defici t can be
biased tow ard slower athletes and
Note:  COD = change of direction; COM = center of mass; ETG = electr onic timing gate;
2D = two-dimensional; 3D= thr ee-dimensional; LiDAR = l ight detection and r anging.
1479
Measure Description Interpretation
provides l imited inf ormation r egarding
COD abi lity, technique, or str ategy .
Ground
contact time
(GCT)The total time the f oot is in
contact wi th the gr ound during
the COD (length of the plant
phase, main ex ecution plant
foot contact)Shorter gr ound contact times ar e
gener ally associated wi th faster COD
performance and indicate the athlete is
spending less time perf orming the COD
(if the athlete deflects their COM at the
same angle). I nsight into GCT can
establ ish whether the athlete is
improving their COD abi lity irrespectiv e
of total time. GCT can be measur ed
using a bui lt-in force platf orm, contact
mat, or v erified using 2D analysis.
Exit velocity The horiz ontal v elocity of
the athlete during the ini tial
step out of the plant of the
COD
Consider ed the first step of
reacceleration f rom plant
foot to f oot strik eUnlike the si tuation f or total time, using
a high-speed video camer a or 3D motion
analysis to assess the v elocity of the
athlete (at the hip or COM) can giv e a
direct measur e of the abi lity to change
direction. I mproved exi t velocity with the
same or f aster gr ound contact times
implies gr eater RFD r elevant to
improving COD abi lity.
Entry v elocityVelocity of the athlete bef ore
the plant phase; can be
measur ed over sev eral steps or
as the last step entering the
plant phase of the CODEntry v elocity is a str ong determinant of
COD completion time, and the abi lity to
enter the COD wi th high v elocity can be
advantageous f or COD actions. I nsight
into entry v elocity can be used to
establ ish whether an y pacing or sel f-
regulatory str ategies ar e adopted.
Assessed using the abo ve methods f or
exit velocity.
Decision-
making timeMeasur ement of the time
between two ev ents is
consider ed decision-making
time and can ei ther be a
positive or a negativ e value.
Decision-making time can be
broken down into two di fferent
orientations toSimilar to the measur ement of entry and
exit velocity, a high-speed camer a can be
positioned to the side of the dir ectional
change to captur e both the stimulus and
the athlete’ s first defini tive foot plant to
change dir ection in r esponse. If the
decision-making time is negativ e, this
indicates that the athlete anticipated the
Note:  COD = change of direction; COM = center of mass; ETG = electr onic timing gate;
2D = two-dimensional; 3D= thr ee-dimensional; LiDAR = l ight detection and r anging.
1480