# Section 20.3

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 20: Program Design and Technique for Speed and Agility Training

**Section:** 20.3 -- Running Speed Development

**PDF Pages:** 1431--1455

neurophysiological adaptations from previous practices would bolster
subsequent training. In an effort to either enhance the force
required or target potential neuromuscular adaptations for sprinting
improvement, resisted and assisted sprint training techniques are
often emplo yed (i.e., secondary methods). The proposed benefi ts,
potential drawbacks, and coaching consider ations are outlined in
table 20.2 .
Strength
As noted throughout the chapter , sprint speed is underpinned by an
athlete’ s ability to produce large forces within brief time periods.
These forces must be large enough to support the body weight in
the presence of gravity and displace the body through an increase in
velocity (62). Thus, many strength and condi tioning professionals
are aware of the importance of resistance training in the
development of a sprint -based athlete. Centr al to the discussion of
resistance training is how best to transfer newly developed strength
qualities from the weight room to the track or field (109). The
transfer of strength improvements to sprinting may require an
emphasis on the specificity of training (i.e., dynamic
correspondence  and coordinative overload ). This transfer of
training effect deals with the degree of performance adaptation and
may result from the similarities between the movement patterns,
peak force, RFD, acceleration, and velocity patterns of an exercise
and the sporting en vironment (98).
While training for maximal strength may be beneficial, training
should emphasiz e agendas that merge maximal strength and speed–
strength qualities instead (44). The selection of exercises and
movements that provide opportuni ties to displa y forces and
velocities like those found in sprinting may have the most benefi t
with regard to enhancing rate coding and firing frequency , alongside
alterations to type II muscle fibers such as cross-sectiona l area and
fascicle length (40, 43). For instance, evidence suggests that
weightl ifting movements and their derivatives such as the clean,
1431
snatch, and mid-thigh pulls may enhance sprint performance
through physiological adaptations such as muscular stiffness,
enhanced RFD, and coactiv ation of the musculatur e surrounding the
hips and knees (6, 26, 32).
Mobility
While not a kinetic variable, soft tissue manipulation is a commonly
used practice in the development of speed athletes. Strength and
condi tioning professionals and athletic trainers rely on tools such as
stretching, chiropractic care, massage, and myofascial release to
achiev e optimal mobility within the dynamic state. Mobility is the
freedom of an athlete’ s limb to move through a desired range of
motion, whereas flexibi lity is a joint’s total range of motion. With an
understanding that positional characteristics are among several
limiting factors in performance, strength and condi tioning
professionals should ensur e that proper postur al integri ty is in place
before the onset of pr actice or competi tion.
TABLE 20.2  Assistance and Resistance Training for
Speed Development
Type of
trainingExample
exercise
modalitiesPotential
benefitsPotential
disadvantagesPractical use
suggestions
Note:  SSC = str etch-shortening cy cle.
1432
Type of
trainingExample
exercise
modalitiesPotential
benefitsPotential
disadvantagesPractical use
suggestions
Assistance
training
(e.g.,
overspeed
training)Inclusiv e of
modal ities
such as r ope
towing,
bungee cor d
pulls, or
downhi ll
running wi th
the intention
of allowing
the athlete to
run at
supramaximal
speedsTheor etically,
these tr aining
tools ar e used
to potential ly
expose the
athlete to
higher
velocities than
one can
achiev e in
unassisted
sprinting b y
inducing an
increased step
or stride r ate
and exposing
the athlete to
higher hip
angular
velocities (46).
This incr eased
step r ate is
hypothesiz ed
to have
potential f or
neuromuscular
adaptations to
increase
maximal sprint
velocity.
Increases in
overspeed
should be
limited to
≤10%.Assisted sprinting
may prematur ely
rush an athlete’ s
stance phase,
thus r emoving
time needed to
exert optimal
forces, and has
been shown to
result in
decreased muscle
activation and
propulsiv e force
production in
comparison to
maximal running
(66). Ther efore,
what can be
described as
chop steps ma y
be observ ed.
Undesir able
techniques such
as leaning back
and o verstriding
may be pr esent
in a pr otectiv e
manner to br ake,
which is
suboptimal.
Exercises that
rely on the
towing of
athletes ma y
increase br aking
forces in
comparison to
maximal running
(66) as athletes
attempt toTop-speed
sprinting should
be dev eloped
through mor e
natural and
safer training
tools that
consider an
athlete’ s training
status and
support optimal
biomechanics.
Strength and
condi tioning
professionals
should car efully
assess the
implications of
assistance
modal ities
before
implementation
and these
modal ities ma y
be best used
when working
with adv anced
or elite athletes.
Note:  SSC = str etch-shortening cy cle.
1433
Type of
trainingExample
exercise
modalitiesPotential
benefitsPotential
disadvantagesPractical use
suggestions
tolerate velocities
they cannot
naturally create
or accommodate
because of
biomechanical
efficiency ,
training state, or
both.
Downhi ll sprinting
may expose the
athlete to
unnecessary
eccentric f orces
through a
modified stance
leg that r esults
from ha ving to
find the gr ound.
This ma y also
affect the S SC,
which is
optimiz ed
through the f oot
placement
occurring just in
front of the
center of mass
on ground
contact in flat -
surface upright
sprinting (66).
To date, v ery
little resear ch
supports the
implementation
of overspeed
training, because
sprint suc cess
results from an
Note:  SSC = str etch-shortening cy cle.
1434
Type of
trainingExample
exercise
modalitiesPotential
benefitsPotential
disadvantagesPractical use
suggestions
athlete’ s ability to
produce lar ge
forces in a short
ground contact
time.
Resistance
sprintingInclusiv e of
training
modal ities
such as sled
towing, sled
pushing, wind
resistance,
incline
sprinting, and
sled pushing
with the
intention of
improving an
athlete’ s
accelerative
abilitiesAccentuates
the
biomechanics
of the
acceleration
phase b y
placing the
athlete in a
position that
promotes
lower ed torso
(i.e., forward
trunk lean),
hips, and shin
angles.
Resisted
sprinting ma y
optimiz e an
athlete’ s ability
to cover short
distances
quickly b y
overloading the
acceleration
phase,
resulting in
ground contact
times that
produce higher
propulsiv e
forces.
Improving
acceleration,
which is a
change inSprint ef forts
against a load
that is too gr eat
may lead to
longer gr ound
contact times in
addition to
shorter step
lengths that ar e
not task speci fic
(59).
Slopes of incl ine
that ar e too gr eat
may modi fy
proper sprinting
biomechanics,
resulting in a
rehearsal of
improper
technique and
thus l imiting
transfer of
training ef fect.
Sled pushing ma y
alter the natur al
sprinting gai t
cycle due to the
removal of arm
action that
synchr onizes and
counterbalances
the leg action
occurring at the
hip.Strength and
condi tioning
professionals
and athletes
attempting to
improve the
acceleration
phase of a sprint
may adopt
resistance
training
modal ities that
maintain normal
biomechanics
involved in
unresisted
sprints.
Loads should be
chosen based on
the sporting
context whi le
also considering
the athlete’ s
physical status.
For instance,
track and field
sprinters ma y
use loads that
do not decr ease
running v elocity
by mor e than
10% to 12% (2,
49, 52, 61).
In contr ast, field
sport athletes
Note:  SSC = str etch-shortening cy cle.
1435
Type of
trainingExample
exercise
modalitiesPotential
benefitsPotential
disadvantagesPractical use
suggestions
velocity, may
lead to an
increase in top
speed thr ough
enhanced RFD .
Resisted sprints
and loads, and
velocity
decrements,
can be
manipulated to
target
technical,
speed–
strength,
power , and
strength–speed
qualities (19,
20).
It ma y offer
specificity to
sporting
scenarios when
athletes need
to push (mo ve)
external mass
such as in
bobsled, rugb y,
and American
footbal l.who o vercome
external
resistance whi le
blocking,
tackling, and
scrimmaging
can use loads
20% to 30% of
body weight to
improve the
initial 5-10 m of
movement (28,
52). Frictional
properties wi ll
influence the
amount of
resistance
experienced,
thus pr escribing
sled pushes and
pulls based on
velocity
decrements is
suggested (19,
20).
Note:  SSC = str etch-shortening cy cle.
Based on the previously described constructs of speed, the
currently accepted model of sprint success is based on the athlete’ s
ability to produce and overcome ground reaction forces in a short
amount of time. Moreover, while these GRFs assist in producing
optimal step length through forward propulsion, the sprinter ’s
position in flight may be limited by insufficient mobility (i.e., reduced
hip flexion restricts subseque nt thigh and knee lift). Specifically, an
1436
athlete may possess the physical characteristics necessary to yield
high rates of force in a short amount of time, but compr omises in a
joint’s freedom of movemen t will result in misplaced forces. The
improper placement of forces due to erroneous ground contact will
result in dampened sprint speed and an increased likelihood for
injury .
1437
Agility Performance and Change-of-
Direction Ability
In both field and court sports, there is a substantial number of
preplanned COD movements as well as changes in direction in
response to the ball, the game, teammates, or opponents. In sports
such as basebal l, softbal l, American footbal l, and basketball, athletes
decide before commencemen t of movement on the path they will
run. Such patterns often including a quick or sudden COD—f or
example, exploding into a sprint out of a shuffle off a base or
running a route before receipt of a ball. Howev er, many sports also
include rapid COD in respons e to teammates, opponents, or tactical
situations (i.e., external stimuli). Such responses can occur in an
offensive or a defensive scenario, and the physical movement and
perceptual-cogni tive aspects of such performances impose different
demands on the athlete. Therefore, one should thoroughly
understand the factors associated with agility performance from a
physical standpoint (COD ability) and in combination with the
perceptual-cogni tive aspects (agi lity).
Athletes improve COD ability through development of
several phys ical factors and technical skills during a
variety of speeds and modes of movement. The
development of agility also requires impr oving
perceptual-cognitive abilities in relation to the demands
of the sport.
Factors Affecting Change of Direction and
Perceptual-Cognitive Ability
It is becoming increasingly clear that the ground contact time and
GRF during the plant phase (figure 20.4 on page 643) of a
movement provide valuable insight into the physical factors that
affect COD performance, while perceptual-cogni tive factors must
1438
also be consider ed regarding agility. COD and agility movements
performed at shallow cutting angles (less than 75 degrees) and
associated with shorter ground contact times (less than 250 ms)
(94) benefi t from training similar to speed training with regard to the
physical dema nds but still require additional perceptua l-cogni tive
training. On the other hand, when a COD involves a more aggressive
cutting angle (equal to or greater than 75 degrees), the length of
ground contact time can often exceed 250 milliseconds (8, 48, 64,
36) due to the greater braking requirements. Therefore, one should
consider increasing emphasis on eccentric strength for braking and
maximal strength alongside the concentric impulsiv eness required
for propulsion during the reacceleration. Additional ly, due to the
eccentric –concentric coupl ing during the plant phase of directional
changes, reactiv e strength development is also a key training priority
(36). Figure 20.11  provides an example of how various requirements
(angle of COD or perceptual-cogni tive requirement of agility) may
affect the GRF and ground contact times of athletes. Of particular
interest is the effect of various methods of changing direction (for
the same angle of direction change) on GRF and ground contact
times. The effect of method of changing direction can be seen in
figure 20.11: The 5-0-5 was performed either with a single-leg COD
(outside leg turn) or with a jump turn that can be performed in a
testing environment but is not commonly performed on the field of
play. Nevertheless, this demonstr ates that the techniq ue chosen
dictates the demands; therefore, if trying to elicit a specific
adaptation f rom an athlete, one should pr ovide speci fic instructions.
1439
FIGURE 20.11  Comparison of ground reaction force and contact times during various
change-of - direction and agi lity maneuv ers.
The test used for assessment of agility performance has an
impact on perceived agility ability of the athlete. A pletho ra of tests
are used to assess “agility,” but tests without a reactiv e aspect
should be consider ed COD tests, and a test that includes a reactiv e
stimulus is now by defini tion a test of agility for most sports. Further ,
the requirements of the test may result in assessment of factors
other than COD ability or perceptual-cogni tive requirements.
Therefore, one must be informed about and critical regarding a test
used to assess “agility” or “change-of -direction ability.” For example,
if the Illinois agility test, often performed with soccer athletes (91),
was used after preseason training, improvements in performance
may be due to improved metabol ic capaci ty and not necessari ly
improved COD ability. This is attributed to the length of the Illinois
test, which imposes a higher metabol ic demand than shorter tests
and thus is mor e representativ e of maneuverability .
Howev er, it should be noted that even similar-length tests such as
the traditional 5-0-5 test, the modified 5-0-5 test (the 5-0-5 without
the initial 10 m run-up), and the L-run used on the same athletes
1440
have only a moderate relationship (41), indicating they are not all
assessing the same type of COD ability or the same underpinning
physical requirements. This becomes more appar ent when one
realizes that some tests require a rapid COD while others require
multiple COD. Tests with multiple COD often require more bending
around an object or cone while maintaining as much velocity as
possible, in comparison to a sharp COD that demand s a rapid
deceler ation (e.g., 5-0-5 test). Therefore, tests such as the Illinois
agility or L-run that require a bend to maintain velocity instead of an
aggressive COD could be consider ed tests of maneuv erability (69).
With this said, table 20.3 gives examples of COD and agility tests
and drills that address different physical requirements within the
realm of “agility.” One should  consider the aspect most important to
the given sport when determining COD and agility abilities and
consider testin g and monitoring various types of COD abilities and
perceptual-cogni tive abilities required during true agility tests.
Furthermor e, tests such as the traditional 5-0-5 may be influenced
by an athlete’ s linear running  speed (70, 81); thus, to isolate COD
ability, the COD deficit (5-0-5 test time—10 m linear sprint time)
could be determined (70, 71). Practitioners may also want to
consider an athlete’ s sprint momentum (average velocity during a
linear sprint test or 10 m approach of the traditional 5-0-5 test ×
athlete’ s mass) to provide an indication of the braking demand
experienced by athletes during the 5-0-5 test to give a more
complete view of the athlete’ s COD abi lity.
TABLE 20.3  Aspects of Agility Tested or Trained in
Various Drills and Tests
Change-of-
direction
speed ManeuverabilityPerceptual-
cognitive
abilityMetabolic
requirementa
(average length of
test or drill)
1441
Change-of-
direction
speed ManeuverabilityPerceptual-
cognitive
abilityMetabolic
requirementa
(average length of
test or drill)
TESTS
Reactiv e
agility tests✓ ✓ <3 s
5-0-5 ✓ <3 s
5-10-5 ✓ <5 s
T-test ✓ ✓ <12 sa
Illinois agi lity ✓ <12 sa
L-run ✓ <6 s
DRILLS
Z-drill ✓ ✓ <5 sb
Y-shaped
agility drill
(generic
stimulus)✓ <5 sb
Y-shaped
agility drill
(speci fic
stimulus)✓ ✓ <5 sb
aThe length of the test has a large influence on the metabol ic requirements and whether
changes in test performance can become a function of enhanced condi tioning instead of
directly r elated to impr ovements in COD or agi lity ability.
bDuration dependen t on distances used within the design of the drill. Howev er, it is
advisable to keep the duration of the drill short to emphasiz e technical execution within the
drill.
Data from Gabbet t et al. (2008); Nimphius et al. (2012); Pauole et al. (2000); Serpell et al.
(2011); Sierer et al. (2008); Vescovi and McGuigan (2008); Vescovi et al. (2011); Young
and F arrow (2013).
Change-of-Direction Ability
As stated earlier, one must understand that an athlete’ s measur ed
COD ability may vary depending on the demand imposed by the
1442
chosen COD test. Therefore, it may be beneficial to choose different
tests that measur e this ability under a high-velocity braking
requirement; with multiple COD; or, as will be discussed, in reaction
to a scenario , opponent, or stimulus. Another consider ation
regarding COD ability is the orientation of the body leading into the
deceler ation, through the transition phase as the athlete comes to a
stop, and then the positioning as he or she subsequently
reaccelerates out of the COD. Therefore, the positioning of the trunk
influences the performance of the COD. As such, it is a combination
of the ability to deceler ate (high braking impulse), reorient the body
to face or partially face the direction of intended travel, and then
reaccelerate (high propulsiv e impulse) over short contact times that
truly determines COD ability. Additional ly, the ability to perform the
COD requires the athlete to have the physical capaci ty to produce
high and rapid magni tudes of force, tolerate the high loads
associated with braking, and adopt favorable postur es that are
associated wi th braking and pr opulsion (22, 35).
Considering the requirement s for rapidly changing momentum,
increased muscle mass in combination with decreased body fat (i.e.,
improving functional mass) has been regarded as a predictor of COD
performance when assessed by the T-test in elite basketball players
(23). Other anthropometrics and their relationship to COD ability are
not discussed here, because aspects such as height and limb length
are not modifiable by the strength and condi tioning professional.
Instead, body center of mass height is related to improved lateral
COD performance (89), and this can be actively targeted during
technique modi fication tr aining (22, 35).
Overall, COD ability among a variety of movement patterns
(various angles  of direction change) has been shown to improve with
increased hip extension velocity (rapid application of force by the hip
extensors), low center of mass height, wide lateral foot plants for
perpendicular force application, increased braking impulse and
propulsiv e impulse, increased knee flexion entering the COD,
minimiz ed trunk angular displacement entering the COD
1443
(deceler ation phase), and increased lateral trunk tilt (during 180-
degree changes) (22, 35, 80, 89, 94, 95, 97). Because the ability to
deceler ate, hold body position, and then reaccelerate is important in
COD tasks as described by the kinetic and kinematic requirements of
faster COD and agility performances, it is clear that a well-rounded
approach to strength development involving dynamic, isometric, and
in particular eccentric strength capaci ties is needed for the
development of better COD performances (51, 97), with training
methods that span the entire load– velocity and force–velocity curve
(42) across multiple lower -limb and trunk segments (35). In contrast
to sprint development, it is recommended that athletes under go
training that allows for the neuromuscular system to effectively
adapt to the rate of loading required during the braking phase, with
the understanding that the neuromuscular requirements for braking
capaci ty must be specifically trained using low- and high-velocity
eccentric muscle actions (38) such as those during drop landings,
landing from a loaded jump, or the catch phase of a power clean or
power snatch , in addition to supramaximal eccentrics that
particularly load the knee extensors. All of these place different
eccentric loading demands on the hips, knees, and ankles (67).
The biomechanical demands of directional changes are
influenced by approach speed and COD angle; thus,
practitioners should manipulate these two variables
cautiously when designing COD and agility activities.
Perceptual-Cognitive Ability
When the physical ability to change direction rapidly is present, one
can focus on the components of perceptual-cogni tive ability that
must be developed to bring together the ability to perform both
physical ly and mental ly on the field of play. There are several
components of perceptual-cogni tive ability: visual scanning,
anticipation, pattern recogni tion, knowledge of the situation,
decision-making time and accuracy, and reaction time (86, 88, 94,
1444
110, 111). Many of these aspects of development are sport specific,
and a compr ehensiv e discus sion is beyond the scope of this text.
Howev er, general drills to help improve these skills are discussed in
the section on methods of dev eloping agi lity.
Technical Guidelines and Coaching
In comp arison to sprinting, COD and agility have a large degree of
freedom due to the multitude of movements that occur during a
COD. Further , agility performance as restricted or determined by
opponents or other tactical restraints and scenarios cannot be
trained through the use of a single technique, with evidence to
suggest we should be creating within- and between-ski ll variabi lity
and a flexibl e coordinativ e approach (35). Nevertheless, the
following ar e some technical guidel ines and coaching suggestions.
Visual Focus
When changing direction in response to an opponent (either
offensive or defensive), the athlete should visual ly scan the
environment and opponent while focusing on the shoulders,
trunk, and hip .
Following the anticipation of the event, unless deception is
intended, the athlete should quickly redirect attention to a new
area to help lead the tr ansition of the body .
Body Position During Braking and Reacceleration
Contr ol the trunk leading into the deceler ation (decrease large
amounts of trunk motion) (80). When deceler ating, posterior
trunk lean ma y assist in orienting the f orce vector posteriorly .
Through the stance phase, reorient the trunk and hips toward
the direction of intended travel to allow for a more effective
reacceleration (22) and to reduce the redirection demands for
a mor e effective posi tion to pr oduce f orce (35).
Just as with acceleration mechanics, body lean is paramount in
allowing proper force application through the ground with
1445
strong alignment of the ankle, knee, and hip to the trunk and
shoulders.
Enter and exit changes in direction with a lower center of
mass to increase stability and to enable a manipulation of the
base of support r elative to the center of mass (89).
Leg Action
Ensur e that the athlete can effectively dissipate or tolerate the
eccentric braking loads through an effective range of motion at
the hip, knee, and ankle (i.e., co-triple flexion) and avoid a
stiff-legged br aking st yle (92, 94).
Emphasiz e a firm base of support for effective push-of f and
manipulation of base of support relative to center of mass
(i.e., wide lateral foot plant when cutting, large anterior foot
placement when turning) while pushing the ground away in
order to enhance performance (i.e., rapid simultaneous triple
extension of ankle, knee, and hip), especial ly while learning in
closed drills. External focus of attention—thr ough instructions
to concentr ate on the ground instead of a body part—has
been shown to impr ove COD perf ormance (76).
Arm Action
Powerf ul arm actions should be used to f acilitate leg driv e.
Ensur e that the action of the arms is not counterpr oductiv e
(i.e., does not cause a decrease in speed or efficiency),
particularly during transitioning between difficult COD (e.g.,
from a backpedal to a sprint) , while keeping the arms close to
the body to reduce the moment of inertia and to increase the
total body r otation v elocities when changing dir ection (35).
Transitional Movements
Expressions of agility can be divided into three phases (21): a
transition  whereby the athlete is in a ready position to read and
subsequently react to a situation that arises; an initiation , a
moment when an athlete initiates or changes movement (e.g., a
1446
COD); this leads to the actualization  phase that involves a sport
skill or sprint to a position. For example, a corner back, when
tracking a wide receiver, may perform a backpedal (transition),
before performing a direction al change (initiation) into a sprint and
then intercepting an undert hrown pass (actual ization). While the
success of this play or other expressions of agility manifest in the
actual ization phase, the preceding phases are just as important and
require good technical execution. Backpedaling  (rearward
locomotion with periods of double limb support and one foot in
contact with the ground between contralater al foot strikes) or
backward running  (rearward locomotion involving single-leg
support throughout foot–ground contact and both feet
simultaneously in the air between foot strikes) (101) may be
performed to displace an athlete rearward while maintaining a
forward visual gaze of an opponent or ball, such as in basketball,
soccer, rugby, and footbal l. The frequency and importance of
differing transitional movements may be sport dependent, and more
resear ch is required in specific sports to develop this understanding
(12, 21). Nevertheless, practitioners should develop their athletes’
ability to perform a variety of transitional movements (e.g., lateral
shuffle, backpedal, crossover running) and to perform sprints from
these transitional movements to develop athletes’ movement
solutions and al l-around ph ysical l iteracy.
Figure 20.12  provides a technique checkl ist for common
transitional movements: the backpedal and side-shuf fle. The
backpedal is an essential locomotiv e skill for a defensive back in
American footbal l. The following drill progression could be used to
develop an athlete’ s backpedal ing technique before integrating the
skill with other actions or agi lity drills:
Backpedal ing for 20 yards (18 m) along a marked line on the
footbal l field to establ ish corr ect technique
Backpedal ing for 20 yards (18 m), changing the pace of the
drill via an audio command (e.g., “slow” or “fast”), to develop
1447
the athlete’s ability to adapt backpedal ing speed in line with
tracking an opponent
Backpedal ing and then either on command or when reaching a
checkmark changing direction (either forward, backw ard, or
lateral to ei ther side)
Backpedal ing while tracking an opponent who is initially
running forward and then changing direction to sprint once the
opponent ini tiates a COD or sprint
A similar progression could be used for other transitional
movements such as side-shuf fling in court-based sports such as
basketball and tennis.
Figure 20.12  Technique checklist for common
transitional movements: backpedal and side-
shuffle.
1448
Backpedal
Starting Stance
Stand in a spl it stance, ensuring stabi lity.
Lower the center of mass b y sinking the hips.
Flex the f ront hip and knee to appr oximately 45 degr ees.
Flex the back knee to approximately 90 degrees and the hips to around 60
degrees.
The front foot should be flat (firm base of support), while the rear foot heel
should be r aised. Distribute weight tow ard the bal ls of both f eet.
Keep the back flat.
Lean the torso , with the shoulders o ver the f ront knee.
The head is up looking f orward (or tow ard the opponent; visual scanning).
Relax the arms and hang them str aight ahead of the hips.
First Step
1449
To initiate movement, drive off the back leg by extending the back leg knee
and hip with the center of mass (COM)  moving behind center of pressure at
toe-of f.
Using a low heel recovery, the front leg moves back behind the rear leg and
makes subsequent gr ound contact underneath the hips.
Each f oot contact should be toe to heel (nev er heel first).
Keep hips low to incr ease stabi lity.
Maintain a f orward trunk lean.
Keep the head up and looking f orward (or tow ard an opponent).
Involve a relaxed contralater al arm movement to match the timing and
amplitude of the leg movement. The range of motion at the shoulder should
be smal l.
The hips, knees, and ankles should be aligned in the frontal plane; avoid
planting the foot wider than the hips to help maintain torso and pelvic
position (i.e. , hip step- width) and a void a narr ow step width.
Subsequent Steps
With each step, use a low heel recovery to keep the feet close to the ground
(i.e., rapid limb switching with minimal knee separ ation on ground contact)
to enable  a quicker transition to a subsequent movement (e.g., COD or
forward sprint).
Keep the hips low to maintain a low COM again to help quicken the
transition into the subsequent movement (i.e., minimiz e vertical oscillation).
Possible cues include “sta y low” or “dr op the hips. ”
Each f oot contact should be toe to heel. A possible cue is “toe to heel. ”
Ensur e foot contact  is in line with the hips in the frontal plane to avoid feet
crossing and the risk of trips or f alls.
Maintain a f orward trunk lean.
Keep the head up and looking forward (or toward an opponent). A possible
cue is “ey es up” or “head up .”
Use a relaxed, low-amplitude contralater al arm movement with the objectiv e
to project COM r earward, with minimal v ertical pr ojection and osci llation.
Side-Shuffle
Start Position
Get in an athletic ready position: the feet are shoulder -width apart; weight is
distributed toward the balls of the feet; flex the hips, knees, and ankles (i.e.,
strong quarter-squat position); keep the back flat with a torso lean
(shoulders over knees); the head is up and the arms are by the sides with
elbows flex ed and hands in f ront of the body .
1450
Foot Position
Foot contact is on the bal ls of the f eet.
Feet are placed perpendicular to movement (parallel or slight hip external
rotation).
Feet sta y close to the gr ound.
Foot placement is wider than the knees; increased width increases stability
and lowers COM.
The feet should not cross. (In a diagonal or faster shuffle, the feet may
cross using a crossover step to help with the directional change or provide
extra propulsion to incr ease v elocity [21]. )
Leg Action
Take short steps, driving more from the leg farthest (i.e., pushing the medial
aspect of foot) from the intended direction of travel (i.e., COM moves
medial ly relative to center of pressure at toe-of f), with the other leg acting
as a pivot, allowing  the COM to travel medial ly and assist the shuffle step
(COM is now o ver center of pr essure).
Leg action is close to the gr ound in pr eparation f or ground contact.
COM Travel
COM is projected medially or laterally, with minimal vertical projection and
oscillation.
The legs r emain in a loaded athletic posi tion and the trunk r emains v ertical.
1451
Posture
An athletic posi tion is maintained thr oughout.
Maintain flexion of the ankles, knees, and hips, lowering the COM.
The back r emains flat.
The head is in l ine wi th the body .
1452
Arm Action
Perform a short, r apid arm action in the sagi ttal plane.
Training Goals
The three goals to enhance agility performance through training are
to develop the physical qualities to allow athletes to adopt the
required postur es and positions for a range of different agility
movements performed in the sport as well as enhance braking and
propulsion of such tasks (action capaci ty); to develop movement
efficiency and competency of range of agility movements pertinent
to the athlete’ s sport, and to enhance perceptual -cogni tive ability in
various si tuations and tactical scenarios (35).
1453
Methods of Developing Agility
As discussed throughout the chapter , a multifactorial approach is
warranted to develop both the physical and the perceptual-cogni tive
aspects required for continual improvement in agility performance.
Therefore, one should consider a plan that addresses underpinning
physical capaci ties using various strength development strategies,
technical comp etence in a closed-ski ll environment with movement -
specific action s (COD ability), and improvement of perceptual-
cogni tive capaci ty through agility drills and inherent aspects of skills
practice (58).
Strength
Similar to aspects of strength development for speed, strength
development for agility should emphasiz e relative strength and a
variety of speed–str ength qualities along the force–velocity
spectrum. Howev er, additional development of the eccentric strength
of the athlete due to the large braking forces during deceler ation
and COD actions within expressions of agility should be consider ed.
This means that training exercises can include a spectrum of load–
velocity profiles in the weight  room (42) as well as a variety of load–
velocity profile activities in the field, such as squat jumps,
countermo vement jumps, and drop jumps of various heights in
combination with the COD and agility drills themselv es. The
multifactorial nature of agility warrants a well-rounded approach to
strength development that spans the load– and force–velocity curve.
Table 20.4 provides an example of how training in the weight room
and on the field can satisfy the strength requirements underlying
agility performance. Understanding that athletes will develop the
physical requirements before being able to transfer newly gained
strength into technical competence helps coaches, strength and
condi tioning professionals, and athletes realize that performance
gains will lag behind fundamental physical requirements for a given
technical ski ll (99).
1454
TABLE 20.4  Comparison of Focus for Agility
Development in Novice and Advanced Athletes
Strength
requirementNovice
athletes
(weight room
associated)Novice
athletes
(field and
court drills)Advanced
athletes
(weight room
associated)Advanced
athletes
(field and
court drills)
Dynamic
strength:  required
to provide base
strength f or all
subsequent tr aining
as wel l as to ensur e
adequate mobi lity
during body weight
and loaded tr ainingBody weight
exercisesBody
awareness
work such as
leaning dri llsSquat (and
variations)
Pulls (and
variations)
Split-leg and
unilateral
variationsVarious COD
drills
Concentric
explosive
strength  (may
include isometric
strength work):
required to
effectively
reaccelerate (i.e. ,
propulsion) after
the br aking phase
or maintain str ong
position thr ough
the tr ansition phase
of COD and agi lityBilateral and
unilateral box
jumpsAcceleration
drills
Banded
drills and
isometric
postur al
holdsBox jumps
Weightl ifting-
based
exercises
Squat jumps
(loaded)
Lower -limb
ballistic
exercises
initiated f rom
static
positionsAdvanced
acceleration
drills (e.g. ,
sled push)
Eccentric
strength:  required
to dev elop the
ability to ef fectively
attenuate f orce,
absorb ener gy, and
support lar ge
external lower -limb
flexion moments
required during theSubmaximal
bilateral and
unilateral
landing
stabilization
exercises
(i.e., drop
landing,
single-legSubmaximal
deceler ation
drills (forward
emphasis and
teaching
various
deceler ation
positions)Advanced
bilateral and
unilateral
landing
stabilization
exercises
performed in
various planes
Drop landings
and receivingMaximal
deceler ation
drills (high
velocity and
various angles)
Note: COD = change of dir ection.
Adapted by permission from S. Nimphius, “Increasing Agility,” in High-P erformance Training
for Sports , edited by D. Joyce and D . Lewindon (Human Kinetics, 2014), 194 .
1455