# Section 21.3

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 21: Program Design and Technique for Aerobic Endurance and Metabolic Training

**Section:** 21.3 -- High-Intensity Interval Training

**PDF Pages:** 1556--1570

recovery period between training sessions, the greater the level of
fatigue carried from one training session to the next (33, 110). In
conjunction, there is an increase in the physiological cost of the next
training session and a reduction in training performance, which may
result in lower adaptations (32). Some posttraining fatigue is
necessary for stimulating training adaptations, but it is
simultaneously necessary to maximiz e recovery between training
sessions, particularly if on the same day. To achiev e this,
manipulation of concurr ent training variables such as sequence of
training, training intensi ties, volumes, and frequency as well as the
recovery period between training sessions can be adjuste d (11, 34,
110). Howev er, because athletes respond differently to training
stimul i and recovery techniqu es, it is important to monitor athletes’
recovery via measur es such as heart rate, task completion times,
RPE, blood lactate, power output, and the l ike (35).
Training Sequence
The order in which resistance and aerobic endur ance training
sessions are completed may affect adaptations because the acute
physiological responses for resistance and aerobic endur ance
training are distinct to each form of training (34) and may influence
the quality and quanti ty of training sessions completed on the same
day. Findings have been mixed on the effects of concurr ent training
sequence on strength and V̇O2max (25, 32, 45, 46). As a gener al
guide, howev er, the training sequence should be varied throughout
the phases of the training year and reflect the highest priority (e.g.,
maximizing strength or improving aerobic endur ance)  for each
training cycle; the most important training goal should be trained
first wi thin a giv en work out whi le the athlete is f resh (125).
Mode of Aerobic Endurance Training
The results of a concurr ent training meta- analysis found no
significant differences across the sports studied (i.e., running,
cycling, cross-country skiing, and swimming), with all sports
1556
benefi ting similarly in terms of performance from undertaking a
concurr ent training program (10). Howev er, the difference in muscle
action types (eccentric vs. concentric) may create a greater level of
muscle damage  from some modes compar ed to others (e.g., running
vs. cycling) (143), particularly if large distances are involved.
Therefore, in concurr ent training programs that involve running, a
greater recovery period may be needed when completed in the
hours before or following a resistance training session. This concept
may be especial ly important for athletes undertaking more than one
aerobic endur ance discipl ine, such as triathletes (35).
Athlete Training Status
The training status of athletes has been suggested to be an
important variable to consider when undertaking concurr ent training
(11). While the majori ty of findings indicate that concurr ent training
can benefi t aerobic endur ance performance of athletes of different
levels across different aerobic endur ance discipl ines (10), the
responses may be different. For example, a systematic review and
meta- analysis found that following a concurr ent training  program,
trained or highly trained aerobic endur ance athletes did not
demonstr ate any impairments to improvements in V̇O2max; however,
untrained individuals did (65). Consequently , for aerobic endur ance
athletes who have minimal resistance training experience or for
lesser trained aerobic endur ance athletes, it may be necessary to
allow greater recovery times  between training sessions, or apply a
slower progression of training variables (e.g., intensi ty, frequency , or
duration) or ex ercises compar ed to higher tr ained athletes.
Chapter 18 provides guidel ines for designing resistance training
programs that can apply to aerobic endur ance athlete s; refer to
scenario C for a sample program that focuses on a high school cross
country runner .
1557
Altitude
Altitude  is classified into several categories, ranging from sea level
(>500 m [1,640 ft]) to low (>500-2,000 m [1,640-6,562 ft]),
moder ate (>2,000-3,000 m [6,562-9,843 ft]), high (>3,000-5,500 m
[6,562-18,045 ft]), and extreme (>5,500 m [>18,045 ft]) (39).
While the percentage of oxygen is the same at different altitudes
(94), the atmospheric pressure drops, causing a reduction in partial
pressure (PO 2), which acts as the driving force for gas exchange in
the lungs (39, 94). This leads to a cascade of physiological
responses to compensate for the reduction in PO2. Subsequently ,
aerobic endur ance performance decrements upon acute altitude
exposur e may begin to occur at altitudes as low as 700 meters
(2,297 ft) (145).
Acclimatization to altitude may occur between 12 and 14 days at
moder ate altitudes up to 2,300 meters (7,546 ft); howev er, it has
been found that this process  may take up to several months (145).
According to Wyatt (145), recommendations for optimizing
performance at altitude vary dramatical ly, from arriving immediately
before competi tion (24-48 hr) to 12 weeks of al titude exposur e.
Many elite and sub-el ite athletes train at altitude to produce an
ergogenic effect. In order to experience a benefi t from this type of
training, it has been reported that an athlete must receive a hypoxic
dose of training ≥12 hours per day for a minimum of three weeks at
moder ate altitude (appr oximately 2,100-2,500 m [6,890 -8,202 ft])
(66, 145). Live high, train low (LHTL)  is a method commonly
used by athletes seeking to benefi t from altitude training. LHTL
requires individuals to live at moder ate altitudes, between 2,000
meters and 3,000 meters (6,562-9,843 ft), and train at or near sea
level (66). This method of training allows athletes to simultaneously
experience the benefi ts of altitude acclimatization and training at sea
level (139). Thus, LHTL may potential ly provide an ergogenic benefi t
by allowing athletes to take advantage of the metabol ic and
hematological adaptations experienced when living at altitude to
augment neur omuscular dev elopment at lower al titudes (39, 139).
1558
Heat Acclimation
It is well documented that aerobic endur ance performances are
influenced by hot environments (55, 99, 100). Consequently ,
undertaking training or competi tion in hot environments before an
athlete has acclimatiz ed results in greater thermor egulatory and
cardiovascular strain, fatigue, increased perception of effort, and a
negativ e impact on performance (52) via elevated core and skin
temper atures, increased sweating, and loss of electr olytes. To avoid
these negativ e effects, athletes are advised to acclimatize prior to
competi tion in warm to hot condi tions. Adaptations to heat
acclimation protocols include an increase in plasma volume and
thereby an increase in blood  volume, an improvement in skin blood
flow sensitivity, earlier onset of sweating at a lower core body
temper ature combined with an increase in sweat rate and
evaporative cooling, and a reduction in gastrointestinal distress (51,
101). These changes, along with many others, help provide
cardiovascular stability, lower core and skin temper atures, and a
reduced exercise heart rate. A more detailed description of the
adaptations to training in the heat can be found in chapter 6 (see
the section Heat Ac climatization).
Heat Acclimation Protocols
An athlete can adapt naturally to a hot environment by either living
and training in hot ambient condi tions over a long period of time
(i.e., heat acclimatization) or training in an artificially hot indoor
environment (i.e., heat acclimation) (108). Heat acclimation
protocols are typical ly classified as short (<7 days), medium (8-14
days), or long term (>15 days) (50). Even though the majori ty
(~75%) of heat adaptations occur within the first four to six days of
heat exposur e (e.g., heart rate and core temper ature adaptations)
(101), it may take seven or more days for the remainder of the
adaptations to take place (e.g., enhanced core body temper ature,
cardiovascular , sudomotor , and sweat rate adaptations) (28, 81, 101,
108). It is recommended that athletes participating in long-dur ation
1559
or multiday events as well as those of a lesser training status
undertak e longer protocols to ensur e appropriate levels of heat
adaptation (107).
The frequency of heat exposur e is important because adaptations
occur more rapidly with days of consecutiv e exposur e; howev er, if
over a 10- to 14-da y protocol, one to three days of heat exposur e
are missed, it is unlikely that these missed days will significantly
affect heat acclimation adaptations (107). It is importa nt to note
that twice-dai ly heat exposu re is no more effective than once-dai ly
for physiological, perceptual, or performance adaptations (141). For
a heat acclimation protocol to be effective, an increase in core and
skin temper atures and sweat rate is required (101, 108). To achiev e
this, it is gener ally recommen ded that athletes aim for 60 minutes of
heat exposur e (108) and a maximum of 90 minutes, although 120
minutes has been shown to be effective (115, 144). It should be
noted that it may take time to build up to these exposur e times over
the heat acclimation protocol period as determined by the intensi ty
of the training  sessions as well as the athlete’ s heat tolerance.
Measur es of training intensi ty such as heart rate and performance
times may be misleading in the short term until the athlete heat
acclimatiz es (54). A more appropriate alternativ e may be a scalar
method such as perceived exertion (54). Howev er, markers that an
athlete is positively adaptin g are a lower heart rate and core
temper ature for a given workload, increased sweat rate, and
enhanced aer obic ex ercise capaci ty (115).
Athletes with higher levels of aerobic fitness may acquir e heat
adaptations more rapidly and retain them longer than those athletes
with a lower level of aerobic fitness (101). More aerobical ly fit
athletes can also tolerate higher core body temper atures and
therefore can perform better in the heat (101, 121). Due to the
variabi lity in responses, it is important that all athletes are monitored
throughout an acclimation protocol, especial ly those who are just
starting. Similarly, due to the added risk that hot environments can
pose for athletes during training, several safety precautions should
1560
be implemented when working with heat acclimation protocols. For
example, always begin well hydrated, maintain hydration, ensur e
cooling equipment is available (e.g., cold-water immersion bath or
ice vests), and signs and symptoms of exertional heat illness should
be well known to athletes and staff and be posted. For more
information, r eaders ar e directed to Pry or and col leagues (107).
To determine individual athlete adaptation and decay rates, heat
acclimatization protocols should be practiced months before
competi tion in the heat (9), and athletes should also undertak e a
practice heat event in similar condi tions to those they expect to
perform in on competi tion day (9). It is recommende d that the
environment have a wet-bulb globe temper ature >30 °C (>86 °F) to
provide the necessary stress to elicit heat adaptations in core body
temper ature as wel l as induce a higher sweat r esponse (28).
A reduction in training duration or intensi ty followed by a
progressive increase over the protocol period may be required
compar ed to the usual training load, on the initial introduction of a
heat acclimation protocol (107). In addition, it may be necessary to
use a combination of exercise and passiv e heat exposur e (e.g.,
sauna or hot-water immersion) sessions as the athlete commences
and progresses through the heat acclimation process to enable
integr ation with the athlete’ s training schedule (54). For both hot
sauna (118) and hot-water immersion (147, 148) postexercise
sessions have been found to provide heat acclimation and
performance benefi ts. Howev er, to be successful, it is recommended
that the heat stimulus be applied for a duration of 30 minutes per
session, ideally on consecutiv e days, when possible to maximize heat
acclimation adaptations (61). This process enables athletes to
maintain or elevate their core body temper ature and increase their
sweat rate. An additional benefi t of passiv e heat exposur e is that it
can reduce the volume of heat exercise training (107), which may be
particularly useful when introducing unacclimatiz ed athlet es to heat
acclimation pr otocols.
1561
Conclusion
Training to improve aerobic endur ance performance requires a well-
developed and scienti fically based program. The training program
should be developed in conjunction with periodic performance
assessment and should be structur ed to enhance the strengths and
improve the weaknesses of the athlete. A combination of a variety of
the training types described in this chapter should be used so that all
physiological systems involved in successful performance are
overloaded and chal lenged to r espond wi th posi tive adaptations.
Training programs should be developed far enough in advance
and with enough structur e to ensur e enhancement of performance
but with enoug h flexibi lity to avoid overuse injuries and overtraining.
Although other forms of training can be emplo yed to avoid boredom
and overtraining, activity-speci fic training results in the best
adaptations to training and ultimately the most improvement in
performance.
AEROBIC ENDURANCE TRAINING
EXERCISES
The following section discusses some basic technique considerations
for performanc e of aerobic endur ance training. Gener al guidel ines
for both common aerobic training machines and nonmachine
activities are provided. These exercise instructions are largely
adapted f rom Beck (8).
  1  Treadmi ll  713
  2  Stationary B ike  714
  3  Rowing Machine   715
  4  Stair Stepper   716
  5  Elliptical T rainer   717
1562
  6  Walking (Gai t)  718
  7  Running (Gai t)  718
  8  Freestyle Swimming   719
Aerobic Endurance Training
Exercises
  1  TREADMILL
Starting Position
Begin by attaching the securi ty clip to the clothing where it will
not interf ere with the action of the lower or upper l imbs.
Straddle the belt by placing the feet on the right and left
platform.
Read the instructions on the console of the treadmi ll to gain an
understanding of how to adjust the speed and incline of the
specific treadmi ll being used.
Turn on the machine and adjust the speed of the belt so it is at
the desir ed warm-up speed.
Movement Phase
While holding the handr ails, allow one leg to swing freely, and
using a pa wing action, strik e the tr eadmi ll with the mid-f oot.
Once comfortable with the speed of the belt, begin walking or
running on the tr eadmi ll.
Run or walk, keeping toward the front portion of the machine
while remaining in the center of the tr eadmi ll deck.
Release the hands from the handrails and adjust the speed and
incline unti l the desir ed training lev el is at tained.
Avoid holding on to the console or front handr ails or leaning
backw ard whi le walking or running.
Keep the head up and eyes focused forward to avoid looking
down at the console f or extended periods of time.
1563
Ending Position
Reduce the speed of the treadmi ll and perform a 3- to 5-minute
cooldown to prevent blood pooling in the lower extremities and
improve venous r eturn to the heart.
Step onto the platforms on either side of the belt and turn the
machine of f.
COMMON ERRORS
Continually holding the handrails—holding the handrails
beyond the initial entry phase interrupts posture and
stride mechanics and limits core activation; after the
initial entry phase use a natural walking or running
stride pattern with an upright posture and free moving
arm swing, as if walking or running outside
Looking continuously down at the console, which affects
stride mechanics and posture and can cause neck
discomfort; keep the eyes focused forward, with short
glances to the console as needed to monitor display
information
  2  STATIONARY BIKE
Starting Position
Begin by adjusting the seat height so the knee of the extended
leg is slightly flexed (25-30 degrees) at the bottom of the pedal
stroke.
The foot of the down leg should be flat and parallel to the floor
with the bal ls of the f eet in contact wi th the pedals.
Adjust the seat so the knee is over the center of the pedal on
the extended leg and the hips do not rock back and forth during
pedal ing.
While maintaining a neutral spine position, lean slightly forward
at the hips.
1564
Adjust the handlebars so that when the arms are extende d at a
down ward angle the elbows are slightly flexed. Ideally, the
lower arm and torso will form an angle of approximately 90
degrees.
Movement Phase
Begin pedaling while keepin g the balls of the feet in contact
with the pedals thr oughout the dur ation of the ex ercise.
Maintain a neutral spine postur e and do not round the
shoulders.
With bullhorn handlebars, a variety of hand positions may be
used. These include
pronated, palms-facing-down ward grip, allowing a more
upright postur e;
neutral palms-f acing grip on the sides of the handlebars,
encour aging a gr eater f orward lean; and
racing position, with the forearms resting on the handlebars,
creating maximum f orward lean.
Ending Position
Slow down until the pedals have come to a complete stop, and
then step of f the bik e.
COMMON ERRORS
If pedaling using the toes only and not the balls of the
feet or moving laterally in the seat, the seat is too high.
If the knees come above the height of the hips at the top
of the pedaling stroke, the seat is too low.
If struggling to reach the handlebars, the seat may be
too far back or the handlebars too low. Correct seat and
handlebar height ensures maintenance of power output
throughout the pedaling stroke.
1565
Proper seat height adjustment: ( a) leg straight with knee locked and heel on
pedal; ( b) knee slightly flexed with ball of foot on pedal; ( c) with the pedal at 12
o’clock, the knee is about even with the hips and approximately parallel with the
floor
  3  ROWING MACHINE
Starting Position (Start)
Keep the back upright, not rounded, with a slight forward lean
from the hips.
Hold the head upright whi le looking str aight ahead.
Extend the arms in front of the body and grab the rower handle
while flexing the hips and knees until the shins are
approximately v ertical.
Movement Phase (Drive)
Extend the knees first followed by the hips before using the
arms to pull the handle toward the abdomen just below the rib
cage. As the knees near their end range of motion, tilt the
upper body backw ard by extending the hips before pulling with
the arms to complete the mo vement.
Adjust the air vent to increase (more air admitted) or decrease
(less air admi tted) the r esistance pr ovided.
1566
Ending Position (Finish)
The knees should be fully extended with the torso leaning
slightly backw ard.
Arms are flexed at the elbows and the handle is at the abdomen
just below the rib cage.
Recovery is the movement from the finish position back to the start
in the reverse order of drive phase events—that is, extension of the
arms first before flexion at the hips (to move the upper body
forward), then flexion of the knees back to the start posi tion.
COMMON ERRORS
Using arms and legs at the same time or pulling only
with arms—the legs provide the majority of the power in
the drive phase; the drive phase sequence is knees, hips,
then arms.
The handle going up and over the knees on the way back
or the chain hitting the machine in a whipping motion,
which is often due to the recovery sequence being out of
sync; the recovery sequence is the opposite of the drive
phase, so arms, hips then knees
1567
  4  STAIR STEPPER
Starting Position
Hold the handr ails whi le stepping f orward onto the pedals.
Place the whole f oot in contact wi th each pedal.
Movement Phase
Begin stepping, using the handr ails for support.
While maintaining an upright postur e and with the legs
providing the force, take deep (4- to 8-in. [10-20 cm]) steps.
Keep the hips level and centered on the machine to avoid
swaying f rom side to side or step to step .
Do not allow the steps to contact the floor or the upper-limit
stop of the machine. The heel typical ly comes off the pedal as
1568
the foot is raised but should make contact again with the pedal
when pr essing down.
Continue to hold the handr ails lightly while looking straight
ahead, keeping an upright postur e with the shoulders squar ed
and relaxed, the torso over the hips, the knees aligned with the
feet, and toes pointed f orward.
Ending Position
Hold the handr ails whi le stepping backw ard off the pedals.
COMMON ERRORS
Not keeping an upright posture, or leaning on the
machine, which often is an indication that the level
selected is too high
Taking small steps and staying only on the toes with a
high step frequency, which means the steps are too
shallow
1569
  5  ELLIPTICAL TRAINER
Starting Position
Facing the center console of the elliptical, place one foot on
each pedal.
While standing upright and looking forward, grasp the handr ails
with the torso upright and evenly balanced directly over the
hips, head held high, and shoulders r elaxed (but not r ounded).
Movement Phase
Begin pedal ing forward, moving the arms and legs in a
reciprocating f ashion.
The feet should remain in full contact with the pedals
throughout the duration of the exercise unless the design of the
1570