# Chapter 21: Program Design and Technique for Aerobic Endurance and Metabolic Training

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

**PDF Pages:** 1512--1578

CHAPTER  21
PROGRAM DESIGN AND
TECHNIQUE FOR AEROBIC
ENDURANCE AND METABOLIC
TRAINING
Glen B. Deakin, PhD, and Carwyn P.M. Sharp,
PhD
The authors would like to acknowled ge the significant contributions of Benjamin H.
Reuter, J. Jay Dawes, and P atrick S . Hagerman to this chapter .
After completing this chapter, you will be able to
discuss the f actors r elated to aer obic endur ance perf ormance;
select the mode of aer obic endur ance tr aining;
set aer obic endur ance tr aining f requency based on tr aining
status, sport season, and r ecovery requirements;
assign aer obic endur ance tr aining dur ation and understand i ts
interaction wi th training intensi ty;
assign aer obic endur ance ex ercise intensi ty and understand the
various methods used to moni tor intensi ty;
describe the v arious t ypes of aer obic endur ance pr ograms;
1512
apply the pr ogram design v ariables based on the sport season;
and
address the issues of cr oss-tr aining, detr aining, tapering,
concurr ent tr aining, heat ac climation, and al titude when
designing an aer obic endur ance tr aining pr ogram.
This chapter discusses the gener al principles of program design as
they apply to aerobic endur ance training and a stepwise approach to
designing a saf e and ef fective program.
Improvements in aerobic endurance performance can be derived
only when sound principles are applied during training. While some
of the fundamental mechanis ms responsible for inducing adaptations
during training are undefined, it is clear that in order to adapt, the
various systems and tissues of the body must be challenged by an
exercise stimulus (e.g., specificity and overload). The physiological
systems that are not involved during the training session or not
stressed sufficiently by exercise will not adapt to the training
program (5, 85).
Training specificity  refers to the distinct adaptations to the
physiological systems that arise from the training program.
Moreover, a training effect is limited to the physiological systems
used and overloaded during training (140, 142). To improve aerobic
endur ance performance, training programs must be designed to
enhance the function of the respiratory, cardiovascular ,
musculosk eletal, and nerv ous systems.
For a training adaptation to occur, a physiological system must be
stressed at a level beyond which it is presently accustomed (105).
Following repeated and consistent overload, the physiological
systems of the body adapt to the exercise stress. Adaptations occur
until the tissues are no longer overloaded by the applied exercise
stress. This necessi tates the use of a greater overload for continued
adaptations. Exercise frequency , duration, and intensi ty are the
variables most often manipulated to provide overload to the systems
and tissues of the body .
1513
Successful performance in aerobic endur ance competi tions
involving running, cycling, and swimming depends on athletes’ ability
to cover a fixed distance in the shortest time possible. This requires
athletes to be in peak physical and psychological condi tion for the
competi tion. To reach this level of performance, athletes must
consistently train hard, yet intelligently , to maximize the
physiological adaptations derived from training while avoiding injury
and overtraining. A commonly observ ed trend with aerobic
endur ance athletes is to adopt and embrace the training practices of
highly successful or well-known athletes. Although this strategy may
be effective for a few, most aerobic endur ance athletes would likely
be better served by constructing their own training regimen based
on a good working knowledge of sound training princip les and an
understanding of their own individual ized physical limitations and
needs. Anothe r common belief is that greater overload via longer
duration, higher intensi ty, and greater frequency is required to
improve performance. However, training smarter by identi fying
physiological, biomechanica l, and performance strengths and
weaknesses (e.g., poor leg strength, muscle imbalances, low heat
tolerance) and working to consol idate strengths while correcting
weaknesses, has greater opportuni ties to improve performance
outcomes with lower risk of injuries. An extension of this principle is
applying the minimum effective dose (MED)  (132, 133). MED
was originally used in the pharmaceutical industry to reflect the
understanding that there is a minimum dose of medication needed
to elicit the desired physiological response; the use of medications
results in varying side effects, and the higher the dose of
medication, the greater the side effects. In strength and
condi tioning, this term has been adapted to applying the minimum
amount of training stimul i required to maximiz e adaptations while
simultaneously minimizing the damage and injury risks associated
with training. This concept has also been explor ed as the minimum
training dose needed to maintain the adaptations of resistance
training (126). In conjunction with MED, aerobic endur ance coaches
1514
and athletes have also come to understand the maximum
tolerated dose (MTD)  or maximum effective dose (133). This can
be considered the maximum training workload that provides
measur able benefi ts to the athlete. Howev er, as discussed earlier,
while still providing benefi ts, the side effects of MTD training stress
(e.g., tissue microtrauma and fatigue) are also relatively high, and
the risk –reward balance must be str ongly consider ed.
This chapter is designed to provide the strength and condi tioning
professional with a good working knowledge of the scienti fic
principles of aerobic endur ance training and condi tioning.
Specifically, this chapter includes information about the factors
related to performance, aerobic endur ance training program design
variables, and various types of training programs. Additional
discussion focuses on sport season training and special issues
related to aerobic endur ance training including concurr ent training
(i.e., combining resistance and aerobic endur ance training in one
training program) and heat acclimation. Because it would be
exhaustiv e to summariz e all the relevant information about training
for all possible aerobic endur ance sports, only foundational aerobic
endur ance training topics are presented, with specific examples as
they r elate to running, cy cling, and swimming.
1515
Factors Related to Aerobic Endurance
Performance
When designing aerobic endur ance training programs, it is important
to understand those factors that influence and play a significant role
in successful aerobic endur ance performance. This allows for the
development of sound training programs while minimizing
unnecessary training that may lead to counterpr oductiv e
adaptations, f atigue, injury , or o vertraining.
Maximal Aerobic Capacity
As the duration of the aerobic endur ance event increases, so does
the proportion of the total energy demand that must be met by
aerobic metab olism. Therefore, high maximal aerobic capacity
(V̇O2max)  is necessary for success in aerobic endur ance events
(87). A high correlation has been shown to exist between V̇O2max
and performance in aerobic endur ance events (2, 3, 134, 87).
Consequently , aerobic endur ance training programs should be
designed, in part, to improve V̇O2max. However, although a high
V̇O2max is important for successful performance, other factors may
be equal ly or even more important. These factors include a high
lactate threshold, good exercise econom y, high efficiency in using fat
as a f uel sour ce, and a high per centage of t ype I muscle fibers.
For well-trained aerobic endur ance athletes, improving V̇O2max
may benefi t performance only up to a certain point, especial ly since
these individuals typical ly already possess excellent aerobic capaci ty.
Consequently , the ability to sustain higher velocities during
competi tion and training may have a greater impact on performance
than attempting to make marginal improvements in aerobic capaci ty.
For this reason, many athletes use high-intensi ty interv al training
(HIIT ). HIIT may contribute to performance in highly trained aerobic
endur ance athletes via improvements in peak powe r output,
1516
ventilatory threshold, hydrogen ion buffering, use of fat as a fuel
source, and impr oved ex ercise econom y (76).
Lactate Threshold
In aerobic endur ance events, the best competi tor among athletes
with similar V̇O2max values is typical ly the person who can sustain
aerobic energy production at the highest percentage of his or her
V̇O2max without accumulating large amounts of lactic acid in the
muscle and blood (74). Although numer ous terms have been used to
refer to this phenomenon, lactate thres hold (LT) is the one most
commonly employed in the literature. Lactate threshold is that speed
of movement or percentage  of V̇O2max at which a specific blood
lactate concen tration is observ ed (i.e., 4 mmol/L of blood) or the
point at which blood lactate concentr ation begins to increase above
resting levels (136). Several studies have shown that an athlete’ s LT
appears to be a better indicator of his or her aerobic endur ance
performance than V̇O2max (7, 113). The maximal lactate steady
state (MLSS)  is another term that often appears in the aerobic
endur ance training literature. The MLSS is defined as the exercise
intensi ty at which maximal lactate production is equal to maximal
lactate clearance within the body (14). MLSS is an indicator of the
transition from heavy to severe exercise intensi ty (70). In other
words, while lactate producti on increases at the onset of exercise in
the heavy exercise intensi ty domain, it plateaus and can be
maintained at a steady state at this elevated level. Howev er, if
exercise intensi ty increases further , now entering the severe domain,
lactate increases continual ly until failure. Notably , MLSS is also
synon ymous with critical power  (CP) and critical speed  (CS) in this
regard. The MLSS is consider ed by many to be a better indicator of
aerobic endur ance performan ce than either V̇O2max or the LT (14).
What is clear from this information is that aerobic endur ance
athletes must improve their LT and MLSS. This requires athletes to
conduct some training at elevated levels of blood and muscle lactate
to maximiz e training impr ovements in these ar eas.
1517
Exercise Economy
A measur e of the energy cost of activity at a given exercise velocity
is referred to as exercise economy . Athletes with a high exercise
econom y expend less energy during exercise to maintain a given
exercise velocity (e.g., running speed). Several investigators have
suggested that exercise econom y is an important factor in successful
performance in running events (71), with better performers also
having a slightly shorter stride length and greater stride frequency
compar ed to less successful performers (106). Durin g cycling,
exercise econom y can be affected by body mass size, cycling
velocity, and aerodynamic positioning (7, 41, 42). For cyclists, an
increase in body mass and cycling velocity as well as an inefficient
body position gener ate greater wind resistance, resulting in a
decrease in exercise econom y. It has been demonstr ated that elite
swimmers are much more economical than non-el ite swimmers (6)
and use less oxygen at any given swimming velocity. The most
profound impact on exercise econom y during swimming can be
observ ed when swimming technique becomes more efficient. As
improvements in stroke mechanics occur, energy demand for a given
swimming velocity is reduced (146). Training to improve exercise
econom y is cri tical f or aer obic endur ance athletes.
An improvement in exercise economy can enhance
maximal aerobic capacity (V̇O2max) and lactate
threshold.
1518
Designing an Aerobic Endurance
Program
An effective aerobic endur ance training program must include an
exercise prescription specifically developed for the individual athlete
based on his or her individual strengths and weaknesses, goals, and
sport. This requires manipulation of the primary program design
variables. The sidebar lists the design variables as steps 1 through 5.
Unfortunately , strength and condi tional professionals and athletes
often use the training practices or programs of current successful
strength and condi tional professionals or athletes in their sport. This
does not carefully consider the strengths and weaknes ses of the
athlete and may lead to development of an ineffective or potential ly
harmf ul training program. The optimal development of a safe and
effective training program is to have the factors related to aerobic
endur ance performance evaluated and then use that information to
gener ate a training program specific to the athlete. For example, an
athlete with poor exercise econom y should place a greater emphasis
on training to improve exercise econom y compar ed to other factors
that are known strengths. This might include HIIT with a focus on
technique, as well as using long rest periods. Conversely , athletes
who need to increase LT might consider performing more high-
intensi ty training wi th shorter r est periods.
Aerobic Training Program Design Variables
Step 1 : Exercise mode
Step 2 : Training f requency
Step 3 : Training intensi ty
Step 4 : Exercise dur ation
Step 5 : Exercise pr ogression
1519
Training programs for female athletes do not have to be different
from those used to train male athletes; evidence indicates that
males and females respond similarly to training programs (12, 78).
Refer to chapter 8 for a discussi on on sex-related differences and
their impl ications f or exercise.
Step 1: Exercise Mode
Exercise mode  refers to the specific activity performed by the
athlete: cycling, running, swimming, and so on. When training to
improve aerobic endur ance performance, the athlete should select
activities that mimic as closely as possible the movement pattern
emplo yed in competi tion. This will cause positive adaptations in
specific physiological system s and tissues of the body related to
those used during competi tion. For example, the recruitment of
specific muscle  fibers and the adaptation of the energy systems
within those fibers must be challenged during aerobic endur ance
training. Selecting the appropriate exercise mode during training
ensur es that the systems used in competi tion are challenged to
improve. Note that the more specific the training mode is to the
sport, the greater the improvement in performance is likely to be
experienced. For an athlete involved in multiple aerobic endur ance
sports, or one who is interested in a gener al aerobic endur ance
fitness program, cross-tr aining or participation in multiple aerobic
endur ance activi ties ma y be w arranted (47).
Step 2: Training Frequency
Training frequency  refers to the number of training sessions
conducted per day or per week. The frequency of training sessions
depends on an interaction of exercise intensi ty and duration, the
training status of the athlete, and the specific phase of the sport
(e.g., preparation phase or preseason versus competi tion phase or
in-season). Higher exercise intensi ty and longer duration may
necessi tate less frequent training to allow sufficient recovery  from
exercise sessions. The training status of the athlete can influence
1520
training frequency , with lesser -trained athletes requiring more
recovery days at the beginning of a training period than more highly
trained athlete s. The sport phase or season that the athlete is
currently in can also influence training frequency; an off-season
program may include three to four training days per week, but
training frequency may progress to daily workouts (or even multiple
workouts per day for triathletes and highly competi tive distance
runners) in the preseason. Additional ly, fewer training sessions may
be required to maintain an achieved level of physiological function or
performance than to attain that level initially (128). Appropriate
training frequency is important for the aerobic endur ance athlete,
because too much training may increase the risk of injury , illness, or
overtraining (i.e., maximum tolerable dose). While some evidence
shows a positive relationsh ip between exercise frequency and
increased injury rates (63), these studies used active individuals in a
wide age range, not only young and healthy athletes, as subjects.
Additional resear ch has shown injuries are multifactorial and there is
insufficient evidence defini tively associating injuries with increases or
high levels of training frequency, volume, or other training factors
(44). Conversely, too little training will not result in positive
adaptations to the various systems of the body (i.e., below the
minimum effective dose). Resear ch has shown that it is necessary to
train more than twice per week in order to increase V̇O2max (138).
Many strength and condi tioning professionals recogniz e that multiple
training sessions per day may be needed to improve performance in
some aerobic endur ance athletes. For athletes participating in single-
discipl ine sports such as running, such training practices  should be
reserv ed for those with an advanced or elite training status due to
the level of physiological stress involved with such programs.
Resear ch conducted by Hansen and colleagues (58) showed that
time to exhaustion, resting muscle glycogen concentr ations, and
citrate synthas e activity increased among seven healthy untrained
men after 10 weeks of training twice every other day versus once
daily. It was speculated that training in a glycogen-depleted state
1521
may further increase glycogen resynthesis via an increase in the
transcription and transcription rate of certain genes responsible for
training adapta tions. Howev er, the resear chers cautioned that these
results should not necessari ly be used by strength and condi tioning
professionals and practitioners to guide practice, because low
glycogen concentr ations may reduce the period of time an athlete is
able to train and may increase risk of overtraining. This is one
reason why it is important to monitor the effects of the training load
on athletes. Further , strength and condi tioning professionals and
athletes need to understand that adaptation takes place during
periods of rest, and underta king more frequent training can affect
the recovery pr ocess and, ul timately , the lev el of adaptation.
Recovery from individual training sessions is essential if the
athlete is to derive maximum benefi ts from the subsequent training
session. Exercise performance has been shown to improve following
relative rest from difficult training sessions (16). Obtaining sufficient
rest, becoming rehydrated, and restoring fuel sources are critical
issues for the athlete during recovery. Physical and mental relaxation
and avoidance of strenuous physical activity are particularly
important following days of high-intensi ty or long-dur ation training.
Postexercise ingestion of adequate fluids and electr olytes is
important for replacing those lost during training. If the training
session was especial ly long or intense, postex ercise carbohydrate
intake is important for replacing the muscle and liver glycogen stores
that were likely depleted, as is the ingestion of protein to aid muscle
repair and recovery. More detailed information on this topic can be
found in chapter 11 .
Evidence suggests that while most aerobic endur ance athletes
across a variety of sports (e.g., cycling, running, walking, triathlon)
use nutrition, hydration, stretching, and active recovery, other forms
of recovery (e.g., compr ession garments and ice baths) are not used
as frequently or at all (13, 19). In addition, while many athletes
believe in the benefi ts of different recovery strategies for
competi tion, such as active recovery, self-massage, and massage,
1522
they do not actual ly use them (19). Resear ch has further elucidated
that elite athletes are more likely to use all forms of recovery, except
cold water immersion, than lower tiered well-trained athletes (13).
The use of or lack of use of different strategies has been found to be
related to coach and athlete awareness of the effectiveness of such
strategies (13). Further , the majori ty of athlete information and
recommendations about recovery strategies comes from coaches
and fellow athletes rather than peer-reviewed scienti fic publications
(19). Therefore, to maximiz e recovery, and aid performance, it is
important that coaches and athletes are educated and up to date on
the types of recovery strategies that have been shown in multiple
scienti fic publications to be effective, available, and best suited to
athletes in tr aining and competi tion.
With regards to recovery and training, the term recovery
run/ride/swim , which is often used by aerobic endur ance athletes to
reflect an easy run, ride, or swim after competi tion, or a training
session during the training cycle, must be clarified. Typical ly, a
recovery session would fall under the banner of active recovery,
which relates to low-intensi ty physical activities designed to facilitate
recovery from the metabol ic responses of exercise fatigue (72). A
recovery sessio n should be just that: a session with the intentional
purpose of aiding recovery beyond that achiev able via passiv e rest,
which resear ch indicates it does (40). It is not designed to provide
an extra training stimulus and defini tely should not contribute to any
further muscle damage. Therefore, the recovery session should be
short in duration and of a low intensi ty (i.e., zone 1 ([table 21.1]).
Consequently , an extensiv e aerobic endur ance session or long, slow
distance session should not be used as a recovery run, just because
it is of a low intensi ty. Howev er, even though recovery sessions
should not be consider ed as a training stimulus, they do contribute
to the total amount of exercise completed in a training  cycle and
therefore must be included in all training plans for monitoring and
recovery purposes (36).
1523
TABLE 21.1   Example of a Five-Zone Intensity Scale
to Prescribe and Monitor Training of Aerobic
Endurance Athletes
Intensity
zoneV̇O2 (%
max)Heart rate
(% max)Lactate
(mmol/L)Typical accumulated
duration within zone
1 50-60 60-72 0.8-1.5 1-6 h
2 66-80 72-82 1.5-2.5 1-3 h
3 81-87 82-87 2.5-4.0 50-90 min
4 88-93 88-92 4.0-6.0 30-60 min
5 94-100 93-100 6.0-10.0 15-30 min
This scale is typical of intensi ty zone scales used for aerobic endur ance training
prescription and monitoring. The scale was developed by the Norwe gian Olympic
Federation as a gener al guidel ine based on years of testing of cross-country skiers, rowers,
and biathletes.
Reprinted by permission from S. Seiler, “What is Best Practice for Training Intensi ty and
Duration Distribution in Endur ance Athletes?”  International Journal of Sports Physiology
and P erformance  5 (2010): 277 .
Step 3: Training Intensity
Centr al to causing training adaptations in the body is the interaction
of training intensi ty and duration. Gener ally, the higher the exercise
intensi ty, the shorter the exercise duration. Adaptations in the body
are specific to the intensity , or effort expended during a training
session. High-i ntensi ty aerobic exercise increases cardiovascular and
respiratory function and allows for improved oxygen delivery to the
working muscles (105). Increasing exercise intensi ty may also
benefi t skeletal muscle adaptations by affecting muscle fiber
recruitment (85). As exercise intensi ty is increased , greater
recruitment of type II muscle fibers occurs to meet the increased
power needs. This training stimulus allows those fibers to become
more aerobical ly trained, thereby potential ly improving overall
aerobic perf ormance.
The regulation of exercise intensi ty is critical to the success of
each training session and ultimately the entire program. An exercise
1524
intensi ty that is too low does not stress the body’s systems and
induce the desired physiological adaptations, whereas an intensi ty
that is too high results in excessive fatigue and a prematur e end to
the training session. In either instance, the training session will be
poor and inef fective.
The most accurate methods for regulating exercise intensi ty are
to monitor oxygen consumption during exercise to determine its
percentage of V̇O2max and to periodical ly measur e blood lactate
concentr ation to determine the relationship to LT. If V̇O2max
monitoring is not available, exercise prescriptions can use heart rate,
ratings of perceived exertion, metabol ic equiv alents (in clinical
populations), or exercise velocity to monitor exercise intensi ty.
Power-measuring devices are also frequently used by elite and top-
level amateur competi tors, especial ly in cy cling.
Heart Rate
Heart rate is likely the most frequently used method for prescribing
aerobic exercise intensi ty. The reason is the close relationship
between heart rate and oxygen consumption, especial ly when the
intensi ty is between 50% and 90% of functional capacity
(V̇O2max), also called heart rate reserve (HRR ). HRR is the
difference between an athlete’ s maximal heart rate and their resting
heart rate (24). The most common means of regulating intensi ty
using this method is to determine the specific heart rate associated
with the desired percentage of V̇O2max or the heart rate associated
with the LT. For the greates t precision, this necessi tates laboratory
testing to identi fy these exercise intensi ties. If laboratory testing is
unavailable, the individual’ s age-predicted maximal heart rate
(APMHR)  is often used as the basis for determining exercise
intensi ty. While there are numer ous APMHR equations, all of which
are estimates and have been shown to have varying degrees of bias,
the Fox equatio n (APMHR = 220 - age) appears less prone to under -
and overestimation of HRma x in the gener al population (123). It is
important to note, howev er, that the Fox equation is also susceptible
1525
to individual variabi lity with regards to its accuracy, having a
documented standar d deviation of 10 to 12 beats per minute (123).
Refer to the sidebar Target Heart Rate Calculation s for formulas and
sample calcula tions for determining aerobic endur ance exercise
heart rate ranges using the Karvonen method  and the
percentage of maximal heart rate (MHR) method. The
relationship between V̇O2max, HRR, and MHR is shown in table 21.2 .
TABLE 21.2  Relationship Between  V̇O2max, Heart
Rate Reserve (HRR), and Maximal Heart Rate (MHR)
% V̇O2max % HRR % MHR
50 50 66
55 55 70
60 60 74
65 65 77
70 70 81
75 75 85
80 80 88
85 85 92
90 90 96
95 95 98
100 100 100
Although the Karvonen and percentage of maximal heart rate
formulas provide practical intensi ty assignments, basing  them on
APMHR will entail some inaccuracies (vs. laboratory-tested maximal
heart rates) when exercise intensity is monitored (73). It has been
determined that age contributes significantly to the variabi lity in
maximal heart rate; howev er, the effects of other factors such as
mode of exercise and fitness level must also be consider ed with the
use of heart rate to monitor intensi ty (73). Changes in fitness over
1526
time must also be taken into account when prescribing exercise. As
aerobic power (V̇O2max), LT, MLSS, and exercise econom y improve,
the prescribed  absolute intensi ty will be a lower relative intensi ty,
resulting in a lower stress and stimulus. As such, corresponding
adjustments must be made to increase training intensi ty to maintain
a stimulus that will elicit continuing and sustainable adaptations. To
provide accurate information on the magni tude of these
improvements in aerobic fitness, and to inform subsequent
adjustments in training intensi ty, it is important to test athletes
regularly in each of these factors. Refer to chapters 13 and 14 for
information on selecting, administering, and scoring appropriate
validated field and laboratory tests. Additional ly, using estimations of
exercise intensi ty via estimated maximal heart rate equations
provides no information about the intensi ty associated with the LT.
Without some knowledge of an athlete’ s LT, achiev ed from field or
laboratory testing, a highly effective aerobic endur ance training
program cannot be dev eloped.
Target Heart Rate Calculations
Karvonen Method
Formula
Age-pr edicted maximum heart r ate (APMHR) = 220 - age
Heart r ate reserv e (HRR) = APMHR - r esting heart r ate (RHR)
Target heart r ate (THR) = (HRR × ex ercise intensi ty) + RHR
To determ ine the target heart rate range (THRR), calculate THR using both the
prescribed minimum and maximum intensi ty values.
Example
A 30-year-old athlete with an RHR of 60 beats per minute is assigned an exercise
intensi ty of 60% to 70% of f unctional capaci ty:
APMHR = 220 - 30 = 190 beats/min
RHR = 60 beats/min
HRR = 190 - 60 = 130 beats/min
1527
Lowest number of the athlete’ s THRR = (130 × 0.60) + 60 = 78 + 60 = 138
beats/min
Highest number of the athlete’ s THRR = (130 × 0.70) + 60 = 91 + 60 = 151
beats/min
Percentage of Maximal Heart Rate Method
Formula
Age-pr edicted maximum heart r ate (APMHR) = 220 - age
Target heart r ate (THR) = (APMHR × ex ercise intensi ty)
To determ ine the target heart rate range (THRR), calculate THR using both the
prescribed minimum and maximum intensi ty values.
Example
A 20-year-old athlete is assigned an exercise intensi ty of 70% to 85% of maximal
heart r ate:
APMHR = 220 - 20 = 200 beats/min
Lowest number of the athlete’ s THRR = 200 × 0. 70 = 140 beats/min
Highest number of the athlete’ s THRR = 200 × 0.85 = 170 beats/min
It is also important to note that environmental factors such as
heat, humidi ty, and altitude place additional stresses on the body,
affecting the cardiovascular responses to exercise (68, 117). As
such, the acute and chronic effects of these external factors in
elevating heart rate should be taken into account when prescribing
and moni toring ex ercise intensi ty.
Ratings of Perceived Exertion Scales
Ratings of perceived exer tion (RPE)  scales also can be used to
regulate and monitor intensi ty during aerobic endur ance training.
Evidence suggests that RPE can be used to accurately regulate
intensi ty when  there are changes in fitness level (29); howev er,
resear chers have demonstr ated that the RPE–intensi ty relationship
can be influenced by various external environmental factors such as
passiv e distracters and environmental temper ature (93, 130).
According to Haddad, Padula, and Chamari (56), various subject
characteristics such as age, sex, training status, and fitness level
1528
may influence RPE. Furthermor e, a few environmental factors that
may influence RPE are listening to music, watching television or
video, environmental temper ature, altitude, nutritional
consider ations, and external feedback. Howev er, these authors
suggest that despite the potential influence of these factors, RPE is
still a valid moni toring tool ( table 21.3 ).
TABLE 21.3  Sample Rating of Perceived Exertion
(RPE) Scale
Rating Description
1 Nothing at al l (lying down)
2 Extremely l ittle
3 Very easy
4 Easy (could do this al l day)
5 Moder ate
6 Somewhat har d (starting to f eel it)
7 Hard
8 Very har d (making an ef fort to k eep up)
9 Very, very har d
10 Maximum ef fort (cannot go an y further)
Metabolic Equivalents
Metabol ic equiv alents may also be used to prescribe exercise
intensi ty. One metabolic equivalent (MET)  is equal to 3.5 ml ·
kg−1 · min−1 of oxygen consumption and is consider ed the amount of
oxygen required by the body at rest (3). Metabol ic equiv alent values
have been determined for a variety of physical activities; an activity
with a MET value of 10.0 requires 10 times the oxygen uptak e that is
required by an individual at rest. Assigning MET values as part of an
aerobic exercise prescription requires the strength and conditioning
professional to know (or estimate) an athlete’ s maximal oxygen
1529
uptak e to be able to calculate an exercise MET level. However, the
use of METs in exercise prescription is typical ly limited to clinical
populations.
Intensity Measuring Technology
Previously due to cost, power devices for cycling such as power
measuring cranks and hubs to monitor exercise intensi ty were
mostly only used by professionals and top-lev el amateurs. Resear ch
has supported their use from the perspectiv e of demonstr ating that
they provide valid and reliable power measur ement (49). Howev er,
due to the advancements in technology , it is common to see athletes
of all levels using technology to monitor exercise intensity. This
technology ranges from smart watches to running stride power
meters to power measuring cranks. Each technology has its own
reasons for being selected. For example, using power measuring
cranks in cycling has an advantage over other measur es because
metabol ic rate is closely related to mechanical power production
(30). Also, using power as an intensi ty measur e allows reproducible
intensi ty efforts regardless of environmental condi tions, which may
influence other measur es of intensi ty such as heart rate and velocity
(30). Irrespectiv e of the technology selected to monitor power ,
speed, or similar variables, they should have training zones allocated
to them that r eflect the athlete’ s training status.
Technology also extends to advanced indoor trainers such as
treadmi lls, rowers, and ski and cycle ergometers. Due to the large
variety of technological devices currently available, it is not possible
to address each manuf acturer individual ly. Howev er, some common
points to consider are whether the measur ements of power , speed,
stride length, stride frequenc y, and the like are valid, accurate, and
reliable. While a number of these commonly used devices have been
resear ch tested , many have not. Hence, it is important to review the
product before buying. Also, given the number of variables that can
be measured, it is important to set training intensi ty or target ranges
before using them. Additional ly, strength and condi tioning
1530
professionals must understand what each variable actual ly reflects,
how to interpr et it, and how it may change with respect to the
training pr escribed.
Similarly, while an athlete may be familiar with technology , it does
not mean they are used to the specific device measuring their
performance, and as such, a familiarization period may be required.
For example, it can feel foreign to run on a treadmi ll (activ e, passiv e,
or Alter-G) when one has not done so before. As such, coaching
cues need to be developed and provided to the athlete to ensur e he
or she transitions successfully to the new technology or device. It
also should be noted that variances in technology between indoor
and outdoor equipment or differences in performance between
exercising indoors versus outdoors exist and can produce differing
results (90). For example, it has been shown that running inside on
a treadmi ll at slower speeds  can feel easier and produce a lower
exercise heart rate than running outside at higher submaximal
speeds (90). Aerobic endur ance performance was also found to be
superior outside compar ed to when performed indoors. The
resear chers suggest this may be related to a potential fear of falling
from the treadmi ll at higher speeds and the potential build-up of
heat due to the absence of air flow around the body when running
indoors.
Training Zones
It is common practice in aerobic sports to prescribe exercise within
one of a number of training zones, each of which reflects a training
intensi ty and training goal, rather than a specific heart rate or RPE
(62, 120). The number of zones can vary, typical ly from three to
seven; howev er, the common reference point is often the athlete’ s
lactate or ventilatory threshold. A low-intensi ty or aerobic training
zone can be associated with a stable blood lactate concentr ation
below 2 mmol/L with one or more high-intensi ty or anaer obic
training zones above 4 mmol/L, and lactate threshold training can be
seen as attaining and mainta ining steady state lactate levels in the
1531
zone between 2 mmol/L and 4 mmol/L (120). Figure 21.1 and table
21.1 (page 697) illustrate examples of three and five zone training
models r espectiv ely.
FIGURE 21.1 A three-intensi ty zone model based on identi fication of ventilatory
thresholds. L T = lactate thr eshold; MLS S = maximal lactate steady state; mM = mmol/L.
Step 4: Exercise Duration
Exercise duration  refers to the length of time of the training
session. The duration of a training session is often influenced by the
exercise intensi ty: the longe r the exercise duration, the lower the
exercise intens ity. For example, exercise that is conducted at an
intensi ty above the maximal lactate steady state (e.g., 85% of
V̇O2max) will have a relatively short duration (20-30 min) because
the accumulation of lactate  within the muscle will contribute to
fatigue. Conversely, exercise that is performed at a much lower
intensi ty (e.g., 70% of V̇O2max) may be performed for several hours
before the athlete experiences f atigue.
1532
The duration of a training session is often influenced by
the exercise intensity; the longer the exercise duration,
the lower the exercise intensity.
Step 5: Exercise Progression
Once athletes begin an aerobic endur ance exercise program, they
need to continue training to either maintain or advance their aerobic
fitness level. Howev er, resear ch indicates that aerobic fitness does
not decrease for up to five weeks when frequency decreases to as
few as two times per week as long as training intensi ty is maintained
(126).
Increasing aerobic endur ance fitness requires program
progression, which initially involves increasing the frequency ,
intensi ty, and duration of exercise. Typical ly, for the gener al
population, it is recommended that from week to week within a
longer -term training plan, exercise frequency , intensi ty, or duration
should not increase more than 10% each week to avoid overtraining
or injury (57). While 10% may not seem like a significant increase,
when these increases and their associated adaptations are added
over a longer period of months and years, the adaptations and
performance improvements are substantial and achiev ed while
minimizing the risks of injury  and overtraining. Howev er, for athletes
preparing for long-distance events, and especial ly those starting
from a low fitness level, it may be necessary to adjust this guidel ine
for a small number of weeks within the larger training plan. It should
be noted that if an increase in training volume above 10% is
implemented, it is critical that before doing so monitoring systems
for physical and psychological overtraining symptoms are determined
and implemen ted on a regular basis to recogniz e indications of
overtraining and possible injury early on. For example, a cyclist
riding 68 miles per week across three sessions may increase their
18-mi le tempo and 18-mi le interv al sessions by 10%, thereby
increasing each session by about 2 miles. Given the relatively high
intensi ty of these training sessions, this would be appropriate.
1533
Howev er, to only increase the remaining extensiv e endur ance
session of 32 miles by 10% would only result in an increase of about
3 miles or, assuming they ride at an average of 18 miles per hour, an
increase of 10 minutes, from 1 hour 46 minutes to 1 hour 56
minutes. Instead, given the low impact and intensi ty of exercise and
the time involved, the duration of this extensiv e endur ance ride may
reasonably and safely be extended by 15 to 20 minutes (i.e., about 6
miles), which would equate to an increase of approximately 20%.
But, as stated pr eviously , this incr ease abo ve the r ecommended 10%
should be done cautiously , with injury and overtraining monitoring
systems implemented, and only for a short period of time with an
appropriate increase in recovery time and techniques reflectiv e of
the increased stress on the body. This type of planned increase in
training frequency , intensi ty, or duration may be referred to as short-
term f unctional o verreaching .
An important point regarding training duration progression is that
it is often recommended to use predicted time to set the duration of
a training session rather than distance. This is because training time
factors in the effects of terrain and environmental condi tions,
whereas distan ce does not. For example, if an athlete runs 10 miles
over a flat course in 1 hour and 10 minutes, and then runs a hilly
11-mi le course the following week in a much slower time of 1 hour
and 58 minutes, even though the prescribed distance only increased
by 10%, the time taken was consider ably greater (+48 minutes =
65% incr ease) which is too much f or a week -to-week pr ogression.
Consequently , discretion needs to be used with respect to which
training variable is increased and by how much. Further , to again
avoid symptoms of overtraining or injury , only one training variable
should be incr eased at a time.
Progression of training frequency may be limited by constr aints
such as school, work, and family commi tments. It may not be
possible for the athlete to train every day or to incorpor ate more
than one training session each day. The duration of each training
session is limited by the same constr aints. In these cases, to elicit
1534
further adaptations, a greater reliance on manipulatin g training
intensi ty exists . Note that as the athlete’ s level of fitness changes
over the course of the sport seasons, training intensi ty levels (e.g.,
heart rate range for a given training zone) must be adjusted.
Similarly, as the training environment changes (e.g., from cool to hot
and humid), RPE charts may be particularly helpful for monitoring
intensi ty in addition to heart rate, which will be elevated by the
increased physiologic demands induced by the environmental
condi tions. In conjunction with these points, progression of training
frequency , intensi ty, and duration, along with recovery, should be
monitored at all times to ensure appropriate periods of loading and
unloading are applied, and signs or symptoms of overreaching or
overtraining are detected early. More detailed information on these
topics can be f ound in chapter 24 .
1535
Types of Aerobic Endurance Training
Programs
Several types of aerobic endur ance training programs exist, each
with varying frequency , intensi ty, duration, and progression
parameters. Each type incorpor ates the five design variables and
results in regimens created for specific outcomes. Table 21.4
summariz es the types of aerobic endur ance training and their
common prescriptiv e guidel ines. Sample training programs for each
type of aerobic endur ance training are included after the sections
that f ollow.
TABLE 21.4  Types of Aerobic Endurance Training
Training typeFrequency per
week*Duration (work
bout portion) Intensity
Extensiv e
endur ance1-2 Race distance or
longer (~30-120
min)≤65% of  V̇O2max
Pace/tempo 1-2 ~20-30 min At the L T; at or sl ightly
above race pace
Interval 1-2 3-5 min (wi th a
work:r est ratio of
1:1)Close to  V̇O2max
High-intensi ty
interv al training1 30-90 s (wi th a
work:r est ratio of
1:5)Greater than  V̇O2max
Fartlek 1 ~20-60 min Varies between LSD and
pace/tempo tr aining
intensi ties
*The other days of the week are composed of other training types and rest or recovery
days or sessions.
Data from Lamb (1995); Penteado et al. (2014); Svedenhag (2008); Wells and Pate
(1995).
1536
Extensive Endurance Training
Many aerobic endur ance coaches and athletes over the years have
used the term long, slow distance (LSD)  or high-volume training
to reflect training for a long period of time at a slow pace. Howev er,
this term can give the wrong impression of what an athlete is
actual ly trying to achiev e—that is, to extend their aerobic endur ance
capabi lities, not just exercise slowly for a long duration. Hence, the
term extensive endurance training  is a more appropriate term
and the one used in this text. Irrespectiv e of the term used, a
common factor with extensiv e endur ance training is that the training
distance should be greater than race distance, or the duration should
be at least as long as 30 minutes to 2 hours (98). Howe ver, as the
race distance increases, it is not practical to complete an extensiv e
endur ance training session greater than the race distance. For
example, because of the level of fatigue and tissue damag e, it is not
recommended for athletes to run 26 miles (42 km) or greater in
training before running a marathon. What the athlete relies on in
this situation is a combination  of his or her extensiv e endur ance runs
plus the accumulation of the training  volume over the weeks of
training before the event. The length of an extensiv e endur ance
session will vary according to the training status of the athlete,
where the athlete is in the program, the mode of exercise (e.g.,
cycling vs. running), as wel l as the dur ation of the aer obic endur ance
event for which he or she is training. Gener ally, as the distance
increases from a short (e.g., 5,000 m) to a long (e.g., 26.2-mi le
marathon) or ultradistance aerobic endur ance event, the concept of
running the race distance or greater becomes less likely and
unnecessary . However, it also should be noted that doing greater
than the race distance at the lower end of the aerobic endur ance
distances (e.g., 5,000 m, 10,000 m, or short-distance triathlons) can
be beneficial and is often undertak en.
An extensiv e endur ance training session is typical ly completed at
an intensi ty equiv alent to training zone two (refer to table 21.1 on
page 697). This intensi ty is typical ly characteriz ed as “conversation”
1537
exercise, with the athlete able to talk without undue respiratory
distress, or at a speed that the athlete feels they could run
indefini tely. In gener al, increases in duration are prioritized when
programming extensiv e endurance training sessions into a training
program. It is important to not substantial ly increase the speed of
the extensiv e endur ance sessions in combination with increases in
session duration, for as speed increases the stress of the session
also increases, which in turn lengthens the posttraining recovery
time and therefore can also increase the risk of overtraining or
injury . The physiological benefi ts derived from extensiv e endur ance
training primari ly include enhanced cardiovascular and
thermor egulatory function, improved mitochondrial energy
production and oxidativ e capaci ty of skeletal muscle, and increased
use of fat as a fuel (15, 20, 64, 75, 83, 85, 96, 104, 136, 140, 142).
These changes  are likely to improve the LT intensi ty by enhancing
the body’s ability to clear lactate. Chronic use of this type of training
also causes a change in the metabol ic characteristics of the involved
muscles (27) and an eventual shift of type IIx fibers to type I fibers
(103, 124).
The increase in fat use also causes a sparing of the body’s limited
muscle glycogen reserv es (60, 64, 69, 136). The intensi ty during
extensiv e endur ance training is lower than the intensi ty used during
competi tion. Howev er, extensiv e endur ance training does not
stimulate the neurological patterns of muscle fiber recruitment that
are required during a race (136), and this may result in adaptations
in muscle fibers that ar e not used during competi tion.
Aerobic endur ance training should not be based solely on
extensiv e endur ance training but be combined with other training
methods such as interv al and pace/tempo training to train race pace
endur ance, and improve LT and exercise econom y, thereby ensuring
a complete aerobic endur ance-trained athlete. Even elite distance
running athletes recogniz e the benefi t of this practice, running
approximately 80% of total running distance at extensiv e endur ance
pace over the training year but also incorpor ating various other
1538
types of speed training (59). This ensur es the athlete is not only
more aerobical ly efficient and has muscular endur ance but also has
race speed capabi lities. It is also worth noting that extensiv e
endur ance sessions provide athletes with mental strength and
stamina by experiencing extended periods of time exercising, which
they wi ll encounter on r ace da y.
Pace/Tempo Training
Pace/tempo training  emplo ys an intensi ty at or slightly higher
than race competi tion intensi ty. The intensi ty corresponds
approximately to the maximal lactate steady state; therefore, this
type of training is also often called threshold training  or aerobic–
anaerobic interval trainin g (98). There are two ways to conduct
pace/tempo training: steady and intermi ttent (98). Steady
pace/tempo training is continuous training conducted at an intensi ty
equal to the maximal lactate steady state for durations of
approximately 20 to 30 minutes. The purpose of pace/tempo training
is to stress the athlete at a specific intensi ty and improve energy
production from both oxidative and nonoxidativ e metabol ism.
Intermi ttent pace/tempo training is also referred to as tempo
intervals , cruise interv als, or threshold training (98). During
intermi ttent pace/tempo training, the intensi ty is the same as for a
steady -threshold workout, but the training session consists of a
series of shorter interv als with brief recovery periods between work
interv als. During pace/tempo training, it is important to avoid
exercising at a higher intensi ty than the prescribed pace, assuming
the prescribed  pace is an accurate reflection of maximal lactate
steady state. If the workout seems relatively easy, it is better to
increase the distance than to increase the intensi ty. The primary
objectiv e for this type of training is to develop a sense of race pace
and enhance the body systems’ ability to sustain exercise at that
pace. Pace/tempo training involves the same pattern of muscle fiber
recruitment as is required in competi tion. The benefi ts derived from
1539
this type of training include improved running econom y and
increased L T and MLS S.
Interval Training
Interval training  involves exercise at intensi ties close to V̇O2max.
The work interv als should last between 3 and 5 minutes , although
they can be as short as 30 seconds (3). The rest interv als for 3- to
5-minute work interv als should be equal to the work interv al,
thereby keeping the work-to-rest ratio (W:R) at 1:1. Interval training
permi ts the athlete to train at intensi ties close to V̇O2max for a
greater amount of time than would be possible in a single exercise
session at a continuous high intensi ty. This type of training should
not be performed until a firm base of aerobic endur ance training has
been attained (74). Interval training is very stressful on the athlete
and should be used sparing ly. The benefi ts derived from interv al
training includ e an increased V̇O2max and enhanced anaer obic
metabol ism.
High-Intensity Interval Training
High-intensity interval training  (HIIT) is a form of training that
uses repeated high-intensi ty exercise bouts above MLSS or critical
V̇O2 interspersed with brief recovery periods (76). One high-intensi ty
interv al training protocol is Tabata train ing. This method ology
requires athletes to train at an intensi ty high enough to result in
exhaustion after 7 to 8 repetitions of 20 seconds of work with 10
seconds rest between exercise periods (129). HIIT has been shown
to provide a number of benefi ts to aerobic endur ance performance
in recreational to well-trained  athletes (53, 92, 137). Resear ch has
shown that HIIT may result in increases in V̇O2max in beginner (137)
and trained athletes (92); howev er, in well-trained athletes the
results are less clear (97). The observ ed improvements may be, at
least in part, the result of increases in mitochondrial biogenesis and
function contributing to increased aerobic metabol ism (67, 79). HIIT
has also been associated with improvements in LT (48, 92) and
1540
exercise econom y (48, 53), which have both been strongly
associated with aerobic endur ance performance. In cases where
improvements in aerobic endur ance performance or factors
associated with this performance are similar from HIIT and
traditional low-intensi ty aerobic training, HIIT provides an advantage
by taking signi ficantly less time to complete (23).
According to Buchhei t and Laursen (22), for an optimal stimulus it
is neces sary for athletes to spend a total of several minutes within
the HIIT sessio n above 90% of the V̇O2max. Both short (<45 s) and
long (2- to 4-min) HIIT interv als can be used to elicit different
training responses. For example, shorter interv als with higher
intensi ty may elicit positive changes in neuromuscular power and
exercise econom y, and as the work duration for a single exercise
bout is increased, the energy contribution from fast glycolysis will
likely increase along with blood lactate levels, which may stimulate
improvements in lactate metabol ism.
In performing HIIT, the appropriate amount of rest between
repetitions is critical. If the relief interv als are too short, the athlete
will be unable to put forth a quality effort on subsequent exercise
bouts and also will be at a greater risk for injury . If the rest periods
are too long, many of the benefi ts experienced from challenging the
glycolytic energy system will likely diminish. An example of an
appropriate work-to-rest ratio for long-interv al HIIT training is ≥2 to
3 minutes at or above 90% V̇O2max, with ≤2 minutes of passive or
low-intensi ty activ e recovery (21, 22, 77).
Fartlek Training
Fartlek training  (the word Fartlek  originates from the Swedish
term for speed play) is a combination of several of the previously
mentioned types of training. Although Fartlek training is gener ally
associated with running, it can also be used for cycling and
swimming. A sample Fartlek run involves easy running (~70%
V̇O2max) combined with either hill work or short, fast bursts of
running (~85-90% V̇O2max) for short time periods. Athletes can
1541
apply this basic format to cycling and swimming by simply combining
extensiv e endurance training, pace/tempo training, and interv al
training. A Fartlek training workout challenges all systems of the
body and may help reduce the boredom and monoton y associated
with daily training. This type of training is likely to enhanc e V̇O2max,
increase the L T, and impr ove exercise econom y and f uel use.
The various  types of training induce different
physiological responses. Ideally, a sound program would
incorporate all types of training into the athlete’s
weekly, monthly, or yearly training schedule.
1542
Application of Program Design to
Training Seasons
The program design variables and the various types of aerobic
endur ance training are applied to athletes’ sport seasons to create a
yearly or season-long training  program. Typical ly, the training year is
divided into phases that include the off-season (sometimes called
base training ), preseason, in-season (sport competi tion), and
postseason (activ e rest). Table 21.5 summariz es the main objectiv es
and the typical program design assignments for each training
season.
TABLE 21.5  Sport Season Objectives and Program
Design Assignments
Sport season ObjectiveFrequency
per weekDuration
or volume Intensity
BEGINNER ATHLETE
Off-season
(base tr aining)Develop sound condi tioning
base3-4 Moder ate to
longLow to
moder ate
Preseason Improve factors important to
aerobic endur ance
performance3-5 Moder ate to
longLow to high
In-season
(competi tion)Maintain f actors important to
aerobic endur ance
performancea3-5 (tr aining
and racing)Short
(training)High
(training)
Moder ate Low or high
Race Moder ate to
aA combination of training formats (i.e., extensiv e endur ance, pace/tempo , and high-
intensi ty interv als of varying distances or duration) are required to maintain aerobic
endur ance, L T, and ex ercise econom y between r aces.
bA combination of training formats (i.e., extensiv e endur ance, pace/tempo , and high-
intensi ty interv als of varying distances or duration) are required to maintain aerobic
endur ance, L T, and ex ercise econom y between r aces.
Data from Lamb (1995); Penteado et al. (2014); Svedenhag (2008); Wells and Pate
(1995).
1543
Sport season ObjectiveFrequency
per weekDuration
or volume Intensity
distance high (r acing)
Postseason
(activ e rest)Recovery from competi tive
season2-3 Short Low
ADVANCED ATHLETE
Off-season
(base tr aining)Develop sound condi tioning
base5-6 Long Low to
moder ate
Preseason Improve factors important to
aerobic endur ance
performance6-7 Moder ate to
longModer ate to
high
In-season
(competi tion)Maintain f actors important to
aerobic endur ance
performance and incr ease
goal r ace pace endur anceb5-6 (tr aining
and racing)Short
(training)Low
(training)
Moder ate Low or high
Race
distanceHigh (r acing)
Postseason
(activ e rest)Recovery from competi tive
season3-5 Short Low
aA combination of training formats (i.e., extensiv e endur ance, pace/tempo , and high-
intensi ty interv als of varying distances or duration) are required to maintain aerobic
endur ance, L T, and ex ercise econom y between r aces.
bA combination of training formats (i.e., extensiv e endur ance, pace/tempo , and high-
intensi ty interv als of varying distances or duration) are required to maintain aerobic
endur ance, L T, and ex ercise econom y between r aces.
Data from Lamb (1995); Penteado et al. (2014); Svedenhag (2008); Wells and Pate
(1995).
Off-Season (Base Training)
The priority in off-season  training is to develop a large base of
cardiorespiratory fitness. Initially, the training program should
progress to be composed of long-dur ation and low-intensi ty
workouts. In the mid- to late off-season, intensi ty and, to a lesser
extent, duration are increased; howev er, it is typical ly recommended
that intermediate and advanced athletes should not increase their
training duration or volume  more than 5% to 10% per week.
1544
Howev er, for beginner athletes who start with a very low training
volume, it may be safe and logical to increase by more than 10%.
For example, an athlete who is new to running may run 1 mile (1.6
km) three times in their first week. By following the 10%
recommendation, the following week would realize an increase of
only a total of 0.3 miles (0.5 km), whereas the athlete should
logical ly be able to absorb more than this—in this case, an additional
0.5 miles (0.8 km) on two separ ate days (i.e., a total of 1 mile [1.6
km] or 33% increase). Similarly, cyclists, by the nature of the
volume of training they engage in as well as the low-impact nature
of their sport, may be able to safely increase their volume by more
than 10%. For example, a beginner cyclist may complete an average
of 25 miles (40 km) in a week. The recommendation would mean
the following week they would increase their volume by a total of
1.25 to 2.5 miles (2-4 km). If this athlete is training at an average
speed of 10 miles per hour (16 km/h), this volume would equate to
an additional 7.5 to 15 minut es, which in both absolute and relative
terms is small. Howev er, it is also important to consider that training
is progressed across many weeks in a training program, and even
small changes  on a week-to-week basis will eventual ly add up to
substantial increases in volume or intensi ty. Therefore, while an
initial increase in volume of >10% may be advisable in some,
continued increases across a training program of more than 5% to
10% per week may create a substantial training stress that exceeds
an athlete’ s maximal tolerable dosage, particularly as the stress from
training accumulates across the training program. Aside from
backgr ound and training status, individual differences in response to
training volume stimul i should also be taken into account. To avoid
injury and optimiz e training adaptations, some athletes will require
more recovery time, including a slower increase in training volume,
than their peers. Monitoring subjectiv e levels of fatigue and
soreness, and objectiv e measur es such as resting heart rate and
heart rate variabi lity, can help guide appropriate increases in training
volume. It should also be noted that increasing training duration too
1545
much too quickly can actual ly lead to decreases in aerobic
endur ance perf ormance (75).
Sample Training Program for a Beginner
Marathon Runner During the Off-Season
(Base Training) Phase
Sunday Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday
Rest
day45 min
Fartlek run30 min
aerobic runRest da y 45 min
aerobic runRest
day60 min
aerobic run
Comments
Frequency . To help combat overtraining or overuse, the aerobic training days should
be spr ead out ev enly during the week to al low recovery between sessions.
Duration. Since the athlete’ s race distance is a marathon, the duration or running
distance of the extensiv e endur ance training sessions should progressively approach
80% to 85% that of the marathon, at least for one of the two aerobic (extensiv e
endur ance) sessions.
Intensi ty. To comp lete the extensiv e endur ance sessions, the athlete should run at a
low intens ity or a slow training pace; high respiratory stress should be avoided. The
aerobic runs should be at zone 1 on the three-zone intensi ty scale (figure 21.1 on
page 701 ) or z one 2 on the fiv e-zone intensi ty scale ( table 21.1  on page 697 ).
Sample Swim Training Program for an
Intermediate 140.6 Triathlete During
the Off-Season (Base Phase)
1546
Sunday Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday
Rest
day45 min
aerobic
swim2 min interv als
@ 80%
V̇O2max/2 min
passiv e
recovery × 8
reps45 min
aerobic swimRest da y
(no swim
workout)1 mile
(1.6 km)
Fartlek
swim45 min
aerobic
swim
This pr ogram has a swim f ocus; the r ace swim distance is 2.4 mi les (3.9 km).
Comments
Frequency . Because the interv al and Fartlek workouts are stressful, these training
sessions should be spr ead out during the week to al low recovery between sessions.
Duration. The intervals are work bouts of 2 minutes with ≤2-minute passiv e recovery
between r epetitions.
Repetitions. The interv als ar e 6 to 10 r eps × 2 minutes.
Intensi ty. The athlete should swim at an intensity (pace) at or above 80% V̇O2max
when completing the work portions of the interv al session. The aerobic swims should
be at zone 1 on the three-zone intensi ty scale (figure 21.1 on page 701) or zone 2 on
the fiv e-zone intensi ty scale ( table 21.1  on page 697 ).
Preseason
During the preseason , the athlete should focus on progressively
increasing training intensi ty, maintaining or reducing duration, and
incorpor ating all types of aerobic training stimul i into the program.
The strengths and weaknesses of the individual athlete should
determine the amount and f requency of each t ype of tr aining.
Sample Training Program for a Beginner
50 Kilometer (31 Mile) Cyclist During
the Preseason Phase
Sunday Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday
Rest
day60 min
aerobic30 min
pace/tempoRest da y 45 min
Fartlek rideRest
day75 min
aerobic ride
1547
Sunday Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday
ride ride
Comments
Frequency . Because  the pace/tempo and Fartlek rides are stressful, these two training
days should be spr ead out during the week to al low recovery between sessions.
Duration. For steady pace/ tempo training, exercise duration is shorter than race
distance or dur ation to al low for a higher tr aining intensi ty.
Intensi ty. The athlete should  cycle at a high intensity or a fast training pace for both
pace/tempo and Fartlek sessions; high respiratory stress is required to simulate race
pace. The aerobic rides should be at zone 1 on the three-zone intensi ty scale (figure
21.1 on page 701 ) or z one 2 on the fiv e-zone intensi ty scale ( table 21.1  on page 697 ).
Sample Training Program for an
Intermediate 10 Kilometer (6.2 Mile)
Runner During the Late Preseason Phase
Sunday Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday
Rest
day10 reps of
0.5 km (0.3
mi) interv als
at race pace
with a 1:1
W:R ratio10 km
(6.2 mi)
easy run45 min
aerobic runHIIT 3 min @
90%
V̇O2max/2
min passiv e
recovery × 6
reps45 min
aerobic
run45 min
Fartlek run
on flat
course
Comments
Frequency . Because  the interv al runs are stressful, these training sessions should be
spread out during the week to al low recovery between sessions.
Duration. The total distance  or duration of the training portion of the session (i.e., the
sum of the interv al work bouts) should approach the competi tion distances as the
athlete becomes mor e highly tr ained.
Intensi ty. The athlete should run at an intens ity (pace) close to or above LT when
completing the work bout portions of the interv al training sessions. The aerobic runs
should be at zone 1 on the three-zone intensi ty scale (figure 21.1 on page 701) or
zone 2 on the fiv e-zone intensi ty scale ( table 21.1  on page 697 ).
1548
In-Season (Competition)
The in-season  training program needs to be designed to include
competi tion or race days in the training schedule. Low-intensi ty and
short-duration training days should precede scheduled competi tions
so that the athlete is fully recovered and rested. The types of
training emplo yed during the in-season are based on the continued
goal of improving weaknesses and maintaining strengths of the
athlete.
Sample Training Program for a 5
Kilometer (3.1 Mile) Collegiate Cross-
Country Runner During the In-Season
Phase
Sunday Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday
Rest or
easy run60 min
aerobic
run45-min
Fartlek run
of har d/easy
work on hi lls
and flats20 min
pace/tempo
run30 min
aerobic run
with race
pace pickups20 min
aerobic
run wi th
race pace
pickupsCompeti tion
Comments
Frequency . Because  Fartlek and tempo runs are stressful, no more than two in total
should oc cur during the week.
Duration. The total distance  or duration of the training portion of the session (i.e., the
sum of the interv al work bouts) should approach the competi tion distance as the
athlete becomes mor e highly tr ained.
Intensi ty. The athlete should run at an intensi ty (pace) close to V̇O2max when
completing the work bout portions of the Fartlek training sessions and LT for the
tempo run. The aerobic runs should be at zone 1 on the three-zone intensity scale
(figure 21.1 on page 701) or zone 2 on the five-zone intensi ty scale (table 21.1 on
page 697 ).
1549
Postseason (Active Rest)
During the postseason , the main focus should be on recovering
from the previous competi tive season. Low training duration and
intensi ty are typical for this active rest phase, but enough overall
exercise or activity should be performed to maintain a sufficient level
of cardiorespiratory fitness, muscular strength, and lean body mass.
During the postseason, the aerobic endur ance athlete should focus
on rehabi litating injuries incurr ed during the competi tive season and
improving the str ength of weak or under condi tioned muscle gr oups.
A sound year-round aerobic endurance training program
should be divided into sport seasons with specific goals
and objectives designed to improve performance
gradually and progressively.
1550
Special Issues Related to Aerobic
Endurance Training
In addition to the program design variables, it is important to
consider other related issues when developing an aerobic endur ance
training program. These include cross-tr aining, detraining, tapering,
and supplemental resistance training. The strength and condi tioning
professional should contemplate these issues when adapting the
types of aerobic endur ance training programs to an individual athlete
or developing an aerobic endur ance program based on the sport
season.
Cross-Training
Cross-training  is a mode of training that can be used to maintain
gener al condi tioning in athletes during periods of reduced training
due to injury or during recovery from a training cycle (96). Cross-
training may reduce the likelihood of overuse injuries because it
distributes the physical stress of training to muscle groups different
from those used during training (122). Multiple-ev ent athletes also
use cross-training to maximiz e performance in swimming, cycling,
and running. The benefi ts derived from cross-tr aining include
adaptations of the respiratory, cardiovascular , and musculoskeletal
systems (88, 122). It seems reasonable to expect that cross-training
would maintain some level of condi tioning in single-ev ent athletes
who perform another mode of training (e.g., runners who perform
cycling or swimming). To be effective in maintaining V̇O2max, cross-
training must be equal in intensi ty and duration to the athlete’ s
primary mode of exercise; howev er, cross-tr aining will not improve
single-ev ent performance to the same magni tude as mode-speci fic
training only (96).
Detraining
Detraining  occurs when the athlete reduces the training duration or
intensi ty or stops training altogether due to a break in the training
1551
program, injury , or illness. In the absence of an appropriate training
stimulus, the athlete experiences a loss of the physiological
adaptations brought about by training. It has been demonstr ated
that most of the physiological adaptations attained with training
regress rapidly toward pretraining levels when the training stimulus
is removed (5, 102). To avoid some of the effects of detraining, the
use of other training mode s may be beneficial; howev er, cross-
training may only attenuat e some of the loss of physiological
adaptation normal ly seen during complete cessation of training.
Aerobic endur ance athletes can minimiz e the effects of detraining by
continuing to use their primary mode of exercise at reduced
frequency and intensi ty, if possible (136).
Tapering
Tapering  is an importa nt component  of the training program as
aerobic endur ance athletes prepare for major competi tion. Tapering
involves the systematic reduction of training duration and intensi ty,
combined with an increased emphasis on technique work and
nutritional interv ention. The objectiv e of tapering the training
regimen is to attain peak performance at the time of competi tion.
While the duration of the taper depends on numer ous factors, a
typical tapering period may last between 7 and 28 days (91).
Although most of the available resear ch on tapering has been
conducted on swimmers (95, 126, 131), the use of tapering is not
limited to these aerobic endur ance athletes. Resear ch among
runners and cyclists has shown that these aerobic endur ance
athletes also benefi t from a well-planned tapering regime n (18, 91).
Tapering before competi tion helps facilitate recovery and rehydration
and pr omotes incr eases in muscle and l iver gly cogen stor es (91).
Several types of tapering models may be emplo yed by athletes in
order to restore impair ed physiological capaci ties resulting from the
rigors of training. The most common tapering models are linear,
step, and progressive tapers (131). The linear taper is characteriz ed
by a gradual decrease in the overall daily training volume throughout
1552
the duration of the taper. In contrast, a step taper is typified by an
abrupt and consider able reduction (normal ly ≥50%) in training
volume that is maintained throughout the duration of the taper
without fluctuation. The progressive taper uses a combina tion of the
linear and step tapering models. This model is associated with a
rapid 10% to 15% immediate reduction in training volume, with
smaller, more gradual reductions in volume at each tier. Training
volume is systematical ly reduced while intensi ty and frequency are
maintained.
Concurrent Aerobic Endurance Training
and Resistance Training
Resistance training is an important but often overlook ed factor in
improving performance in aerobic endur ance athletes. This may be
due to misconceptions that resistance training may increase an
athlete’ s nonfunctional muscle mass and thereby decrease
performance, or the potenti al interference phenomenon that may
occur when resistance and aerobic endur ance training sessions are
completed within a training program (i.e., concurrent training )
(35). Howev er, apart from the well-known benefi ts that resistance
training can provide athletes, such as reducing muscle imbalances,
assistance with preventing overuse injuries, and recovery from
injuries (122), numer ous research investigations (25, 32, 45, 82, 84,
109, 114, 119, 127, 135), meta- analyses, and systematic review
articles (1, 4, 10, 11, 17, 31, 37, 38, 65, 80, 89, 116, 143) have
demonstr ated that it can also improve performance (e.g., time trial,
middle- and long-distance) across a number of aerobic endur ance
discipl ines including running, cycling, cross-country skiing, and
swimming, and performanc e-related variables such as strength,
power , running econom y, and maximal sprint speed. For example, a
systematic review found that resistance training not only improved
running performance from distances of 1,500 meters (0.9 mile) to
10,000 meters  (6.2 miles) but also improved muscular strength and
power factors as well as running econom y (1). More specifically,
1553
both heavy resistance training and explosiv e or plyometric training
have been found to be effective training methods to concurrently
train with aerobic endur ance training to improve running econom y
(10, 31). Improvements in running econom y and performance
following heavy resistance training and plyometric training are
primari ly related to an increase in strength of the muscles used
during running thereby reducing the relative intensi ty of the load of
the exercising muscles (43). Plyometric training, which uses the
stretch-shortening cycle, not only improves the storage and elastic
energy properties of the exercising muscles but assists them to work
more efficiently (86). It is important to note that maximal strength
training has been found to produce greater benefi ts than
submaximal strength training or maximal power training, with
submaximal strength training  producing the least gains of all other
methods (10).
It is also worth highlighting that no signs of overtraining (1) or
significant increases in body mass (1, 17), maximal oxygen uptak e
(17), or blood lactate markers (17) have been associated with the
aerobic performance improvements for the majori ty of concurr ent
training studies. Howev er, not all concurr ent training studies (143)
have resulted in improvements in aerobic endur ance performance
measur es. The differences between studies is often due to the
choice of resistance training exercises (e.g., high vs. low intensi ty,
explosiv e or plyometric) (80), characteristics of the participants, and
methods used to measur e performance improvements (17). It is also
worth noting that studies that reported no improvement in running
econom y often used a lower frequency of resistance training
sessions (17) and shorter duration concurr ent training programs (31,
38).
Exercise Selection
Most studies found that athletes who have benefi ted from
concurr ent training used free weight, multijoint exercises (17). This
benefi t may be r elated to the higher lev el of muscle coor dination and
1554
hence neuromuscular stimulus experienced with free weights
compar ed to machine-based or single-joint exercises (17). For those
studies involving running, the benefi t may also be related to the
greater transference from the resistance training environment to the
running movement due to the biomechanical similarity between the
two (17). High- velocity movements including plyometric exercises
such as hops, bounds, jumps, drop jumps, and squat jumps have
shown to have a positive impact on aerobic endur ance performance
measur es (31, 38). For more information, refer to chapters 18 and
19 for program design and technique detai ls.
Training Intensity and Frequency
A common finding of concurr ent training resear ch for improving
aerobic endur ance performance is the use of heavy resistance
training or plyometric training by athletes two or three times per
week (10, 17) or a combination of both (4, 31, 38). Howev er, to
reduce the impact of a resistance training session on a subsequent
aerobic endur ance training session (i.e., residual fatigue, muscle
soreness, and physiological disturbance), the volume should be
reduced to limit the potenti al carryover of fatigue caused by the
resistance training session (35). That is, keep the loads high (e.g.,
≥90% of 1RM or ≤4RM) (38) but the weekly volume low (31). It is
also worth noting that strength developed during a preparatory
phase has been found to be maintained for up to 12 weeks with just
one resistance training session per week thereafter (111), thus
allowing athlet es to maintain strength gains throughout subsequent
training phases wi th minimal time commi tment.
Recovery Time Between Concurrent Training Sessions
The level of recovery during a concurr ent training program is
influenced not only by the intensity, frequency , and duration of the
individual training sessions but also the mode of aerobic endur ance
training (e.g., running vs. cycling) and type of resistance training
performed (e.g., velocity of movement) (35). The shorter the
1555
recovery period between training sessions, the greater the level of
fatigue carried from one training session to the next (33, 110). In
conjunction, there is an increase in the physiological cost of the next
training session and a reduction in training performance, which may
result in lower adaptations (32). Some posttraining fatigue is
necessary for stimulating training adaptations, but it is
simultaneously necessary to maximiz e recovery between training
sessions, particularly if on the same day. To achiev e this,
manipulation of concurr ent training variables such as sequence of
training, training intensi ties, volumes, and frequency as well as the
recovery period between training sessions can be adjuste d (11, 34,
110). Howev er, because athletes respond differently to training
stimul i and recovery techniqu es, it is important to monitor athletes’
recovery via measur es such as heart rate, task completion times,
RPE, blood lactate, power output, and the l ike (35).
Training Sequence
The order in which resistance and aerobic endur ance training
sessions are completed may affect adaptations because the acute
physiological responses for resistance and aerobic endur ance
training are distinct to each form of training (34) and may influence
the quality and quanti ty of training sessions completed on the same
day. Findings have been mixed on the effects of concurr ent training
sequence on strength and V̇O2max (25, 32, 45, 46). As a gener al
guide, howev er, the training sequence should be varied throughout
the phases of the training year and reflect the highest priority (e.g.,
maximizing strength or improving aerobic endur ance)  for each
training cycle; the most important training goal should be trained
first wi thin a giv en work out whi le the athlete is f resh (125).
Mode of Aerobic Endurance Training
The results of a concurr ent training meta- analysis found no
significant differences across the sports studied (i.e., running,
cycling, cross-country skiing, and swimming), with all sports
1556
benefi ting similarly in terms of performance from undertaking a
concurr ent training program (10). Howev er, the difference in muscle
action types (eccentric vs. concentric) may create a greater level of
muscle damage  from some modes compar ed to others (e.g., running
vs. cycling) (143), particularly if large distances are involved.
Therefore, in concurr ent training programs that involve running, a
greater recovery period may be needed when completed in the
hours before or following a resistance training session. This concept
may be especial ly important for athletes undertaking more than one
aerobic endur ance discipl ine, such as triathletes (35).
Athlete Training Status
The training status of athletes has been suggested to be an
important variable to consider when undertaking concurr ent training
(11). While the majori ty of findings indicate that concurr ent training
can benefi t aerobic endur ance performance of athletes of different
levels across different aerobic endur ance discipl ines (10), the
responses may be different. For example, a systematic review and
meta- analysis found that following a concurr ent training  program,
trained or highly trained aerobic endur ance athletes did not
demonstr ate any impairments to improvements in V̇O2max; however,
untrained individuals did (65). Consequently , for aerobic endur ance
athletes who have minimal resistance training experience or for
lesser trained aerobic endur ance athletes, it may be necessary to
allow greater recovery times  between training sessions, or apply a
slower progression of training variables (e.g., intensi ty, frequency , or
duration) or ex ercises compar ed to higher tr ained athletes.
Chapter 18 provides guidel ines for designing resistance training
programs that can apply to aerobic endur ance athlete s; refer to
scenario C for a sample program that focuses on a high school cross
country runner .
1557
Altitude
Altitude  is classified into several categories, ranging from sea level
(>500 m [1,640 ft]) to low (>500-2,000 m [1,640-6,562 ft]),
moder ate (>2,000-3,000 m [6,562-9,843 ft]), high (>3,000-5,500 m
[6,562-18,045 ft]), and extreme (>5,500 m [>18,045 ft]) (39).
While the percentage of oxygen is the same at different altitudes
(94), the atmospheric pressure drops, causing a reduction in partial
pressure (PO 2), which acts as the driving force for gas exchange in
the lungs (39, 94). This leads to a cascade of physiological
responses to compensate for the reduction in PO2. Subsequently ,
aerobic endur ance performance decrements upon acute altitude
exposur e may begin to occur at altitudes as low as 700 meters
(2,297 ft) (145).
Acclimatization to altitude may occur between 12 and 14 days at
moder ate altitudes up to 2,300 meters (7,546 ft); howev er, it has
been found that this process  may take up to several months (145).
According to Wyatt (145), recommendations for optimizing
performance at altitude vary dramatical ly, from arriving immediately
before competi tion (24-48 hr) to 12 weeks of al titude exposur e.
Many elite and sub-el ite athletes train at altitude to produce an
ergogenic effect. In order to experience a benefi t from this type of
training, it has been reported that an athlete must receive a hypoxic
dose of training ≥12 hours per day for a minimum of three weeks at
moder ate altitude (appr oximately 2,100-2,500 m [6,890 -8,202 ft])
(66, 145). Live high, train low (LHTL)  is a method commonly
used by athletes seeking to benefi t from altitude training. LHTL
requires individuals to live at moder ate altitudes, between 2,000
meters and 3,000 meters (6,562-9,843 ft), and train at or near sea
level (66). This method of training allows athletes to simultaneously
experience the benefi ts of altitude acclimatization and training at sea
level (139). Thus, LHTL may potential ly provide an ergogenic benefi t
by allowing athletes to take advantage of the metabol ic and
hematological adaptations experienced when living at altitude to
augment neur omuscular dev elopment at lower al titudes (39, 139).
1558
Heat Acclimation
It is well documented that aerobic endur ance performances are
influenced by hot environments (55, 99, 100). Consequently ,
undertaking training or competi tion in hot environments before an
athlete has acclimatiz ed results in greater thermor egulatory and
cardiovascular strain, fatigue, increased perception of effort, and a
negativ e impact on performance (52) via elevated core and skin
temper atures, increased sweating, and loss of electr olytes. To avoid
these negativ e effects, athletes are advised to acclimatize prior to
competi tion in warm to hot condi tions. Adaptations to heat
acclimation protocols include an increase in plasma volume and
thereby an increase in blood  volume, an improvement in skin blood
flow sensitivity, earlier onset of sweating at a lower core body
temper ature combined with an increase in sweat rate and
evaporative cooling, and a reduction in gastrointestinal distress (51,
101). These changes, along with many others, help provide
cardiovascular stability, lower core and skin temper atures, and a
reduced exercise heart rate. A more detailed description of the
adaptations to training in the heat can be found in chapter 6 (see
the section Heat Ac climatization).
Heat Acclimation Protocols
An athlete can adapt naturally to a hot environment by either living
and training in hot ambient condi tions over a long period of time
(i.e., heat acclimatization) or training in an artificially hot indoor
environment (i.e., heat acclimation) (108). Heat acclimation
protocols are typical ly classified as short (<7 days), medium (8-14
days), or long term (>15 days) (50). Even though the majori ty
(~75%) of heat adaptations occur within the first four to six days of
heat exposur e (e.g., heart rate and core temper ature adaptations)
(101), it may take seven or more days for the remainder of the
adaptations to take place (e.g., enhanced core body temper ature,
cardiovascular , sudomotor , and sweat rate adaptations) (28, 81, 101,
108). It is recommended that athletes participating in long-dur ation
1559
or multiday events as well as those of a lesser training status
undertak e longer protocols to ensur e appropriate levels of heat
adaptation (107).
The frequency of heat exposur e is important because adaptations
occur more rapidly with days of consecutiv e exposur e; howev er, if
over a 10- to 14-da y protocol, one to three days of heat exposur e
are missed, it is unlikely that these missed days will significantly
affect heat acclimation adaptations (107). It is importa nt to note
that twice-dai ly heat exposu re is no more effective than once-dai ly
for physiological, perceptual, or performance adaptations (141). For
a heat acclimation protocol to be effective, an increase in core and
skin temper atures and sweat rate is required (101, 108). To achiev e
this, it is gener ally recommen ded that athletes aim for 60 minutes of
heat exposur e (108) and a maximum of 90 minutes, although 120
minutes has been shown to be effective (115, 144). It should be
noted that it may take time to build up to these exposur e times over
the heat acclimation protocol period as determined by the intensi ty
of the training  sessions as well as the athlete’ s heat tolerance.
Measur es of training intensi ty such as heart rate and performance
times may be misleading in the short term until the athlete heat
acclimatiz es (54). A more appropriate alternativ e may be a scalar
method such as perceived exertion (54). Howev er, markers that an
athlete is positively adaptin g are a lower heart rate and core
temper ature for a given workload, increased sweat rate, and
enhanced aer obic ex ercise capaci ty (115).
Athletes with higher levels of aerobic fitness may acquir e heat
adaptations more rapidly and retain them longer than those athletes
with a lower level of aerobic fitness (101). More aerobical ly fit
athletes can also tolerate higher core body temper atures and
therefore can perform better in the heat (101, 121). Due to the
variabi lity in responses, it is important that all athletes are monitored
throughout an acclimation protocol, especial ly those who are just
starting. Similarly, due to the added risk that hot environments can
pose for athletes during training, several safety precautions should
1560
be implemented when working with heat acclimation protocols. For
example, always begin well hydrated, maintain hydration, ensur e
cooling equipment is available (e.g., cold-water immersion bath or
ice vests), and signs and symptoms of exertional heat illness should
be well known to athletes and staff and be posted. For more
information, r eaders ar e directed to Pry or and col leagues (107).
To determine individual athlete adaptation and decay rates, heat
acclimatization protocols should be practiced months before
competi tion in the heat (9), and athletes should also undertak e a
practice heat event in similar condi tions to those they expect to
perform in on competi tion day (9). It is recommende d that the
environment have a wet-bulb globe temper ature >30 °C (>86 °F) to
provide the necessary stress to elicit heat adaptations in core body
temper ature as wel l as induce a higher sweat r esponse (28).
A reduction in training duration or intensi ty followed by a
progressive increase over the protocol period may be required
compar ed to the usual training load, on the initial introduction of a
heat acclimation protocol (107). In addition, it may be necessary to
use a combination of exercise and passiv e heat exposur e (e.g.,
sauna or hot-water immersion) sessions as the athlete commences
and progresses through the heat acclimation process to enable
integr ation with the athlete’ s training schedule (54). For both hot
sauna (118) and hot-water immersion (147, 148) postexercise
sessions have been found to provide heat acclimation and
performance benefi ts. Howev er, to be successful, it is recommended
that the heat stimulus be applied for a duration of 30 minutes per
session, ideally on consecutiv e days, when possible to maximize heat
acclimation adaptations (61). This process enables athletes to
maintain or elevate their core body temper ature and increase their
sweat rate. An additional benefi t of passiv e heat exposur e is that it
can reduce the volume of heat exercise training (107), which may be
particularly useful when introducing unacclimatiz ed athlet es to heat
acclimation pr otocols.
1561
Conclusion
Training to improve aerobic endur ance performance requires a well-
developed and scienti fically based program. The training program
should be developed in conjunction with periodic performance
assessment and should be structur ed to enhance the strengths and
improve the weaknesses of the athlete. A combination of a variety of
the training types described in this chapter should be used so that all
physiological systems involved in successful performance are
overloaded and chal lenged to r espond wi th posi tive adaptations.
Training programs should be developed far enough in advance
and with enough structur e to ensur e enhancement of performance
but with enoug h flexibi lity to avoid overuse injuries and overtraining.
Although other forms of training can be emplo yed to avoid boredom
and overtraining, activity-speci fic training results in the best
adaptations to training and ultimately the most improvement in
performance.
AEROBIC ENDURANCE TRAINING
EXERCISES
The following section discusses some basic technique considerations
for performanc e of aerobic endur ance training. Gener al guidel ines
for both common aerobic training machines and nonmachine
activities are provided. These exercise instructions are largely
adapted f rom Beck (8).
  1  Treadmi ll  713
  2  Stationary B ike  714
  3  Rowing Machine   715
  4  Stair Stepper   716
  5  Elliptical T rainer   717
1562
  6  Walking (Gai t)  718
  7  Running (Gai t)  718
  8  Freestyle Swimming   719
Aerobic Endurance Training
Exercises
  1  TREADMILL
Starting Position
Begin by attaching the securi ty clip to the clothing where it will
not interf ere with the action of the lower or upper l imbs.
Straddle the belt by placing the feet on the right and left
platform.
Read the instructions on the console of the treadmi ll to gain an
understanding of how to adjust the speed and incline of the
specific treadmi ll being used.
Turn on the machine and adjust the speed of the belt so it is at
the desir ed warm-up speed.
Movement Phase
While holding the handr ails, allow one leg to swing freely, and
using a pa wing action, strik e the tr eadmi ll with the mid-f oot.
Once comfortable with the speed of the belt, begin walking or
running on the tr eadmi ll.
Run or walk, keeping toward the front portion of the machine
while remaining in the center of the tr eadmi ll deck.
Release the hands from the handrails and adjust the speed and
incline unti l the desir ed training lev el is at tained.
Avoid holding on to the console or front handr ails or leaning
backw ard whi le walking or running.
Keep the head up and eyes focused forward to avoid looking
down at the console f or extended periods of time.
1563
Ending Position
Reduce the speed of the treadmi ll and perform a 3- to 5-minute
cooldown to prevent blood pooling in the lower extremities and
improve venous r eturn to the heart.
Step onto the platforms on either side of the belt and turn the
machine of f.
COMMON ERRORS
Continually holding the handrails—holding the handrails
beyond the initial entry phase interrupts posture and
stride mechanics and limits core activation; after the
initial entry phase use a natural walking or running
stride pattern with an upright posture and free moving
arm swing, as if walking or running outside
Looking continuously down at the console, which affects
stride mechanics and posture and can cause neck
discomfort; keep the eyes focused forward, with short
glances to the console as needed to monitor display
information
  2  STATIONARY BIKE
Starting Position
Begin by adjusting the seat height so the knee of the extended
leg is slightly flexed (25-30 degrees) at the bottom of the pedal
stroke.
The foot of the down leg should be flat and parallel to the floor
with the bal ls of the f eet in contact wi th the pedals.
Adjust the seat so the knee is over the center of the pedal on
the extended leg and the hips do not rock back and forth during
pedal ing.
While maintaining a neutral spine position, lean slightly forward
at the hips.
1564
Adjust the handlebars so that when the arms are extende d at a
down ward angle the elbows are slightly flexed. Ideally, the
lower arm and torso will form an angle of approximately 90
degrees.
Movement Phase
Begin pedaling while keepin g the balls of the feet in contact
with the pedals thr oughout the dur ation of the ex ercise.
Maintain a neutral spine postur e and do not round the
shoulders.
With bullhorn handlebars, a variety of hand positions may be
used. These include
pronated, palms-facing-down ward grip, allowing a more
upright postur e;
neutral palms-f acing grip on the sides of the handlebars,
encour aging a gr eater f orward lean; and
racing position, with the forearms resting on the handlebars,
creating maximum f orward lean.
Ending Position
Slow down until the pedals have come to a complete stop, and
then step of f the bik e.
COMMON ERRORS
If pedaling using the toes only and not the balls of the
feet or moving laterally in the seat, the seat is too high.
If the knees come above the height of the hips at the top
of the pedaling stroke, the seat is too low.
If struggling to reach the handlebars, the seat may be
too far back or the handlebars too low. Correct seat and
handlebar height ensures maintenance of power output
throughout the pedaling stroke.
1565
Proper seat height adjustment: ( a) leg straight with knee locked and heel on
pedal; ( b) knee slightly flexed with ball of foot on pedal; ( c) with the pedal at 12
o’clock, the knee is about even with the hips and approximately parallel with the
floor
  3  ROWING MACHINE
Starting Position (Start)
Keep the back upright, not rounded, with a slight forward lean
from the hips.
Hold the head upright whi le looking str aight ahead.
Extend the arms in front of the body and grab the rower handle
while flexing the hips and knees until the shins are
approximately v ertical.
Movement Phase (Drive)
Extend the knees first followed by the hips before using the
arms to pull the handle toward the abdomen just below the rib
cage. As the knees near their end range of motion, tilt the
upper body backw ard by extending the hips before pulling with
the arms to complete the mo vement.
Adjust the air vent to increase (more air admitted) or decrease
(less air admi tted) the r esistance pr ovided.
1566
Ending Position (Finish)
The knees should be fully extended with the torso leaning
slightly backw ard.
Arms are flexed at the elbows and the handle is at the abdomen
just below the rib cage.
Recovery is the movement from the finish position back to the start
in the reverse order of drive phase events—that is, extension of the
arms first before flexion at the hips (to move the upper body
forward), then flexion of the knees back to the start posi tion.
COMMON ERRORS
Using arms and legs at the same time or pulling only
with arms—the legs provide the majority of the power in
the drive phase; the drive phase sequence is knees, hips,
then arms.
The handle going up and over the knees on the way back
or the chain hitting the machine in a whipping motion,
which is often due to the recovery sequence being out of
sync; the recovery sequence is the opposite of the drive
phase, so arms, hips then knees
1567
  4  STAIR STEPPER
Starting Position
Hold the handr ails whi le stepping f orward onto the pedals.
Place the whole f oot in contact wi th each pedal.
Movement Phase
Begin stepping, using the handr ails for support.
While maintaining an upright postur e and with the legs
providing the force, take deep (4- to 8-in. [10-20 cm]) steps.
Keep the hips level and centered on the machine to avoid
swaying f rom side to side or step to step .
Do not allow the steps to contact the floor or the upper-limit
stop of the machine. The heel typical ly comes off the pedal as
1568
the foot is raised but should make contact again with the pedal
when pr essing down.
Continue to hold the handr ails lightly while looking straight
ahead, keeping an upright postur e with the shoulders squar ed
and relaxed, the torso over the hips, the knees aligned with the
feet, and toes pointed f orward.
Ending Position
Hold the handr ails whi le stepping backw ard off the pedals.
COMMON ERRORS
Not keeping an upright posture, or leaning on the
machine, which often is an indication that the level
selected is too high
Taking small steps and staying only on the toes with a
high step frequency, which means the steps are too
shallow
1569
  5  ELLIPTICAL TRAINER
Starting Position
Facing the center console of the elliptical, place one foot on
each pedal.
While standing upright and looking forward, grasp the handr ails
with the torso upright and evenly balanced directly over the
hips, head held high, and shoulders r elaxed (but not r ounded).
Movement Phase
Begin pedal ing forward, moving the arms and legs in a
reciprocating f ashion.
The feet should remain in full contact with the pedals
throughout the duration of the exercise unless the design of the
1570
machine causes the r ear heel to l ift.
The knees should not be allowed to come forward past the toes
when in the flex ed posi tion.
Hold onto the handr ails in order to maintain balance. If handr ail
holding is unnecessary , it is a good idea to release the hold on
the handrails and pump the arms similarly to the way they
move in w alking or running.
The incline of the elliptical may be increased to more closely
simulate a running motion or reduced to replicate a walking
motion.
Performing this exercise with a forward motion may place
greater emphasis on the quadriceps; performing it with a
backw ard motion may increase the stress on the hamstrings
and gluteals.
Ending Position
Slow down until the machine has come to a complete stop, then
step of f the pedals.
COMMON ERRORS
Lifting the heels and applying too much pressure via the
forefoot; use the whole pedal to distribute pressure
when applying force to the pedals
Leaning on the handrails, which disengages the core
muscles and affects movement phase execution; if
necessary to hold on for balance, ensure an upright
posture is always maintained and the core is engaged,
and avoid placing hands too low on the handrails, which
can cause a forward lean
1571
  6  WALKING (GAIT)
Body Position
Hold the head upright wi th the ey es looking str aight ahead.
Relax the shoulders, and do not al low them to r ound.
Position the upper body directly over the hips while keepin g the
ear, shoulder , and hip al igned.
Foot Strike
The heel should strike the ground first, followed by a gentle
rolling heel-to-bal l action, allowing the weight to be spread over
the foot.
The weight should transfer from the outer side of the heel and
continue to shift forward and slightly inward toward the middle
of the bal l of the f oot at push-of f.
Stride
1572
Without rolling the pelvis (unless racewalking), allow the hips to
move freely to incr ease stride length.
Lift the knees and engag e the hips and gluteals in the
movement.
Arm Action
The arms should swing forward and backw ard in a reciprocating
fashion with the lower body (i.e., when the left arm is forward,
the right leg is extended, and vice v ersa).
The shoulders should be relaxed, allowing the arms to swing
freely.
At faster w alking speeds, the actions should be as f ollows:
The arms should be flexed at the elbows and maintained at
90 degr ees wi th arm mo vement originating at the shoulders.
The arms and hands should swing backw ard and forward,
not crossing the midline of the body, in order to create
forward propulsion.
The hands should stay relaxed, with the hand coming up to
the level of the chest at the nipple line on the forward swing
and the hip bone at the side of the body on the backw ard
swing.
Note:  Racewalkers must increase hip rotation with each stride to
create a pelvic roll. This enables them to increase stride length while
keeping one foot in contact with the ground at all times per the rules
of the sport.
  7  RUNNING (GAIT)
Body Position
Hold the head upright wi th the ey es looking str aight ahead.
Relax the shoulders, but do not al low them to r ound.
Position the upper body during running with an approximately
2- to 4-degr ee lean from the heels to the athlete’ s head while
keeping the ear , shoulder , and hip al igned.
1573
Foot Strike
The foot should strike the ground slightly in front of or directly
below the athlete’ s center of gravity (i.e., hips), which may be a
heel, mid-, or forefoot strike, followed by a gentle rolling heel-
to-bal l action, allowing the weight to be spread over the foot
during the f oot contact phase.
The weight will likely transfer from the outer side of the heel
and continue to shi ft.
Stride
Without rolling the pelvis (unless racewalking), allow the hips to
move freely to incr ease stride length.
Lift the knees and engag e the hips and gluteals in the
movement.
With each running step, the foot should land approximately
under the hips to avoid braking and minimiz e contact time with
the gr ound.
Arm Action
The arms should swing forward and backw ard in a reciprocating
motion with the lower body (i.e., when the left arm is forward,
the right leg is extended, and vice v ersa).
The shoulders should be relaxed, allowing the arms to swing
freely.
The arms and hands should swing backw ard and forward from
the shoulder , not crossing the midline of the body, in order to
create f orward propulsion.
Arm action of ±20-degr ee oscillation of the hands is acceptable
and ma y impr ove running econom y (91a).
  8  FREESTYLE SWIMMING
Swimming performance is a combination of swimming-speci fic
fitness and technique. Less-than-optimal swimming technique can
significantly and negativ ely affect an athlete’ s performance due to
1574
inefficient stroke execution, increase in drag, or a loss of power
production in the water. While a number of resour ces are available to
assist athletes  and strength and condi tioning professionals to
address these common errors, the best method to improve
swimming performance is to seek expert advice from a qualified
swim coach, who can not only assess fitness and performance
parameters but also advise from a technical perspectiv e how these
areas can be impr oved.
COMMON ERRORS
Swinging hand entry, in which the hand crosses over the
center line on entry into the water
Early hand entry, which results in a short stroke
Poor catch and pull through—keeping the arm straight
when pulling through the water or finishing the stroke
early (i.e., not pulling through the full stroke)
Ineffective breathing technique such as holding the
breath until the head is out of the water or lifting the
head forward to breathe
Incorrect body position such as the hips dropping and
therefore increasing drag due to keeping the head up to
look forward
KEY TERMS
aerobic–anaer obic interv al training
age-pr edicted maximal heart r ate (APMHR)
altitude
base tr aining
concurr ent tr aining
cross-tr aining
cruise interv als
detraining
duration
1575
exercise econom y
extensiv e endur ance tr aining
Fartlek tr aining
frequency
functional capaci ty
heart r ate reserv e (HRR)
high-intensi ty interv al training (HIIT )
in-season
intensi ty
interv al training
Karvonen method
lactate thr eshold
live high, tr ain low (LHTL)
long, slow distance tr aining (LSD)
maximal aer obic capaci ty (V̇O2max)
maximal lactate steady state (MLS S)
maximum toler ated dose (MTD)
metabol ic equiv alent (MET )
minimum ef fective dose (MED)
mode
off-season
pace/tempo tr aining
percentage of maximal heart r ate (MHR) method
postseason
preseason
ratings of per ceived ex ertion (RPE)
recovery
Tabata tr aining
tapering
tempo interv als
threshold tr aining
training speci ficity
STUDY QUESTIONS
1576
  1.  Which of the following is not an adaptation following exposur e
to a heat ac climation pr otocol?
  a.  incr ease in cutaneous blood flow
  b.  incr ease in plasma v olume
  c.  onset of sweating at a lower cor e temper ature
  d.  less di lute sweat
  2.  Al l the following statements concerning heat acclimation for
aerobic endur ance tr aining ar e corr ect, ex cept f or which one?
  a.  Most heat adaptations ar e reported to oc cur wi thin the
first four to six da ys of heat exposur e.
  b.  Athletes wi th a lower lev el of aer obic fi tness can acquir e
heat adaptations mor e rapidly as wel l as retain them
longer than those athletes wi th a higher lev el of aer obic
fitness.
  c.  Heat ac climatization pr otocols should be pr acticed months
before competi tion in the heat.
  d.  Heat exposur e training f requency is important because
adaptations oc cur mor e rapidly wi th days of consecutiv e
exposur e.
  3.  Which of the following statements is not true concerning
concurr ent tr aining?
  a.  Most studies f ound that athletes who ha ve benefi ted from
concurr ent tr aining ha ve used machine- and single-joint -
oriented ex ercises only .
  b.  Hea vy resistance tr aining and explosiv e or ply ometric
training b y athletes two to thr ee times per week ha ve
been f ound to impr ove aerobic endur ance perf ormance.
  c.  The lev el of r ecovery following concurr ent tr aining
sessions ma y be influenced not only b y the intensi ty,
frequency , and dur ation of the individual tr aining sessions
but by the mode of aer obic endur ance tr aining and t ype of
resistance tr aining perf ormed.
  d.  The tr aining sequence should be v aried thr oughout the
phases of the tr aining y ear to r eflect what is most
1577
important during that phase of tr aining.
  4.  Enhanced cardiovascular and thermor egulatory function,
improved mitochondrial energy production and oxidativ e
capaci ty of skeletal muscle, and increased use of fat as a fuel
are all physiological benefi ts of what type of aerobic
endur ance tr aining?
  a.  intensiv e pace tr aining
  b.  interv al training
  c.  tempo tr aining
  d.  extensiv e endur ance tr aining
  5.  HIIT may contribute to performance in highly trained aerobic
endur ance athletes via several improvements including which
of the f ollowing?
  a.  impr ovements in peak power output
  b.  lowering of the v entilatory thr eshold
  c.  decr eased use of f at as a f uel sour ce
  d.  reduced h ydrogen ion buf fering
1578