# Section 21.1

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 21: Program Design and Technique for Aerobic Endurance and Metabolic Training

**Section:** 21.1 -- Aerobic Endurance Program Design

**PDF Pages:** 1512--1535

CHAPTER  21
PROGRAM DESIGN AND
TECHNIQUE FOR AEROBIC
ENDURANCE AND METABOLIC
TRAINING
Glen B. Deakin, PhD, and Carwyn P.M. Sharp,
PhD
The authors would like to acknowled ge the significant contributions of Benjamin H.
Reuter, J. Jay Dawes, and P atrick S . Hagerman to this chapter .
After completing this chapter, you will be able to
discuss the f actors r elated to aer obic endur ance perf ormance;
select the mode of aer obic endur ance tr aining;
set aer obic endur ance tr aining f requency based on tr aining
status, sport season, and r ecovery requirements;
assign aer obic endur ance tr aining dur ation and understand i ts
interaction wi th training intensi ty;
assign aer obic endur ance ex ercise intensi ty and understand the
various methods used to moni tor intensi ty;
describe the v arious t ypes of aer obic endur ance pr ograms;
1512
apply the pr ogram design v ariables based on the sport season;
and
address the issues of cr oss-tr aining, detr aining, tapering,
concurr ent tr aining, heat ac climation, and al titude when
designing an aer obic endur ance tr aining pr ogram.
This chapter discusses the gener al principles of program design as
they apply to aerobic endur ance training and a stepwise approach to
designing a saf e and ef fective program.
Improvements in aerobic endurance performance can be derived
only when sound principles are applied during training. While some
of the fundamental mechanis ms responsible for inducing adaptations
during training are undefined, it is clear that in order to adapt, the
various systems and tissues of the body must be challenged by an
exercise stimulus (e.g., specificity and overload). The physiological
systems that are not involved during the training session or not
stressed sufficiently by exercise will not adapt to the training
program (5, 85).
Training specificity  refers to the distinct adaptations to the
physiological systems that arise from the training program.
Moreover, a training effect is limited to the physiological systems
used and overloaded during training (140, 142). To improve aerobic
endur ance performance, training programs must be designed to
enhance the function of the respiratory, cardiovascular ,
musculosk eletal, and nerv ous systems.
For a training adaptation to occur, a physiological system must be
stressed at a level beyond which it is presently accustomed (105).
Following repeated and consistent overload, the physiological
systems of the body adapt to the exercise stress. Adaptations occur
until the tissues are no longer overloaded by the applied exercise
stress. This necessi tates the use of a greater overload for continued
adaptations. Exercise frequency , duration, and intensi ty are the
variables most often manipulated to provide overload to the systems
and tissues of the body .
1513
Successful performance in aerobic endur ance competi tions
involving running, cycling, and swimming depends on athletes’ ability
to cover a fixed distance in the shortest time possible. This requires
athletes to be in peak physical and psychological condi tion for the
competi tion. To reach this level of performance, athletes must
consistently train hard, yet intelligently , to maximize the
physiological adaptations derived from training while avoiding injury
and overtraining. A commonly observ ed trend with aerobic
endur ance athletes is to adopt and embrace the training practices of
highly successful or well-known athletes. Although this strategy may
be effective for a few, most aerobic endur ance athletes would likely
be better served by constructing their own training regimen based
on a good working knowledge of sound training princip les and an
understanding of their own individual ized physical limitations and
needs. Anothe r common belief is that greater overload via longer
duration, higher intensi ty, and greater frequency is required to
improve performance. However, training smarter by identi fying
physiological, biomechanica l, and performance strengths and
weaknesses (e.g., poor leg strength, muscle imbalances, low heat
tolerance) and working to consol idate strengths while correcting
weaknesses, has greater opportuni ties to improve performance
outcomes with lower risk of injuries. An extension of this principle is
applying the minimum effective dose (MED)  (132, 133). MED
was originally used in the pharmaceutical industry to reflect the
understanding that there is a minimum dose of medication needed
to elicit the desired physiological response; the use of medications
results in varying side effects, and the higher the dose of
medication, the greater the side effects. In strength and
condi tioning, this term has been adapted to applying the minimum
amount of training stimul i required to maximiz e adaptations while
simultaneously minimizing the damage and injury risks associated
with training. This concept has also been explor ed as the minimum
training dose needed to maintain the adaptations of resistance
training (126). In conjunction with MED, aerobic endur ance coaches
1514
and athletes have also come to understand the maximum
tolerated dose (MTD)  or maximum effective dose (133). This can
be considered the maximum training workload that provides
measur able benefi ts to the athlete. Howev er, as discussed earlier,
while still providing benefi ts, the side effects of MTD training stress
(e.g., tissue microtrauma and fatigue) are also relatively high, and
the risk –reward balance must be str ongly consider ed.
This chapter is designed to provide the strength and condi tioning
professional with a good working knowledge of the scienti fic
principles of aerobic endur ance training and condi tioning.
Specifically, this chapter includes information about the factors
related to performance, aerobic endur ance training program design
variables, and various types of training programs. Additional
discussion focuses on sport season training and special issues
related to aerobic endur ance training including concurr ent training
(i.e., combining resistance and aerobic endur ance training in one
training program) and heat acclimation. Because it would be
exhaustiv e to summariz e all the relevant information about training
for all possible aerobic endur ance sports, only foundational aerobic
endur ance training topics are presented, with specific examples as
they r elate to running, cy cling, and swimming.
1515
Factors Related to Aerobic Endurance
Performance
When designing aerobic endur ance training programs, it is important
to understand those factors that influence and play a significant role
in successful aerobic endur ance performance. This allows for the
development of sound training programs while minimizing
unnecessary training that may lead to counterpr oductiv e
adaptations, f atigue, injury , or o vertraining.
Maximal Aerobic Capacity
As the duration of the aerobic endur ance event increases, so does
the proportion of the total energy demand that must be met by
aerobic metab olism. Therefore, high maximal aerobic capacity
(V̇O2max)  is necessary for success in aerobic endur ance events
(87). A high correlation has been shown to exist between V̇O2max
and performance in aerobic endur ance events (2, 3, 134, 87).
Consequently , aerobic endur ance training programs should be
designed, in part, to improve V̇O2max. However, although a high
V̇O2max is important for successful performance, other factors may
be equal ly or even more important. These factors include a high
lactate threshold, good exercise econom y, high efficiency in using fat
as a f uel sour ce, and a high per centage of t ype I muscle fibers.
For well-trained aerobic endur ance athletes, improving V̇O2max
may benefi t performance only up to a certain point, especial ly since
these individuals typical ly already possess excellent aerobic capaci ty.
Consequently , the ability to sustain higher velocities during
competi tion and training may have a greater impact on performance
than attempting to make marginal improvements in aerobic capaci ty.
For this reason, many athletes use high-intensi ty interv al training
(HIIT ). HIIT may contribute to performance in highly trained aerobic
endur ance athletes via improvements in peak powe r output,
1516
ventilatory threshold, hydrogen ion buffering, use of fat as a fuel
source, and impr oved ex ercise econom y (76).
Lactate Threshold
In aerobic endur ance events, the best competi tor among athletes
with similar V̇O2max values is typical ly the person who can sustain
aerobic energy production at the highest percentage of his or her
V̇O2max without accumulating large amounts of lactic acid in the
muscle and blood (74). Although numer ous terms have been used to
refer to this phenomenon, lactate thres hold (LT) is the one most
commonly employed in the literature. Lactate threshold is that speed
of movement or percentage  of V̇O2max at which a specific blood
lactate concen tration is observ ed (i.e., 4 mmol/L of blood) or the
point at which blood lactate concentr ation begins to increase above
resting levels (136). Several studies have shown that an athlete’ s LT
appears to be a better indicator of his or her aerobic endur ance
performance than V̇O2max (7, 113). The maximal lactate steady
state (MLSS)  is another term that often appears in the aerobic
endur ance training literature. The MLSS is defined as the exercise
intensi ty at which maximal lactate production is equal to maximal
lactate clearance within the body (14). MLSS is an indicator of the
transition from heavy to severe exercise intensi ty (70). In other
words, while lactate producti on increases at the onset of exercise in
the heavy exercise intensi ty domain, it plateaus and can be
maintained at a steady state at this elevated level. Howev er, if
exercise intensi ty increases further , now entering the severe domain,
lactate increases continual ly until failure. Notably , MLSS is also
synon ymous with critical power  (CP) and critical speed  (CS) in this
regard. The MLSS is consider ed by many to be a better indicator of
aerobic endur ance performan ce than either V̇O2max or the LT (14).
What is clear from this information is that aerobic endur ance
athletes must improve their LT and MLSS. This requires athletes to
conduct some training at elevated levels of blood and muscle lactate
to maximiz e training impr ovements in these ar eas.
1517
Exercise Economy
A measur e of the energy cost of activity at a given exercise velocity
is referred to as exercise economy . Athletes with a high exercise
econom y expend less energy during exercise to maintain a given
exercise velocity (e.g., running speed). Several investigators have
suggested that exercise econom y is an important factor in successful
performance in running events (71), with better performers also
having a slightly shorter stride length and greater stride frequency
compar ed to less successful performers (106). Durin g cycling,
exercise econom y can be affected by body mass size, cycling
velocity, and aerodynamic positioning (7, 41, 42). For cyclists, an
increase in body mass and cycling velocity as well as an inefficient
body position gener ate greater wind resistance, resulting in a
decrease in exercise econom y. It has been demonstr ated that elite
swimmers are much more economical than non-el ite swimmers (6)
and use less oxygen at any given swimming velocity. The most
profound impact on exercise econom y during swimming can be
observ ed when swimming technique becomes more efficient. As
improvements in stroke mechanics occur, energy demand for a given
swimming velocity is reduced (146). Training to improve exercise
econom y is cri tical f or aer obic endur ance athletes.
An improvement in exercise economy can enhance
maximal aerobic capacity (V̇O2max) and lactate
threshold.
1518
Designing an Aerobic Endurance
Program
An effective aerobic endur ance training program must include an
exercise prescription specifically developed for the individual athlete
based on his or her individual strengths and weaknesses, goals, and
sport. This requires manipulation of the primary program design
variables. The sidebar lists the design variables as steps 1 through 5.
Unfortunately , strength and condi tional professionals and athletes
often use the training practices or programs of current successful
strength and condi tional professionals or athletes in their sport. This
does not carefully consider the strengths and weaknes ses of the
athlete and may lead to development of an ineffective or potential ly
harmf ul training program. The optimal development of a safe and
effective training program is to have the factors related to aerobic
endur ance performance evaluated and then use that information to
gener ate a training program specific to the athlete. For example, an
athlete with poor exercise econom y should place a greater emphasis
on training to improve exercise econom y compar ed to other factors
that are known strengths. This might include HIIT with a focus on
technique, as well as using long rest periods. Conversely , athletes
who need to increase LT might consider performing more high-
intensi ty training wi th shorter r est periods.
Aerobic Training Program Design Variables
Step 1 : Exercise mode
Step 2 : Training f requency
Step 3 : Training intensi ty
Step 4 : Exercise dur ation
Step 5 : Exercise pr ogression
1519
Training programs for female athletes do not have to be different
from those used to train male athletes; evidence indicates that
males and females respond similarly to training programs (12, 78).
Refer to chapter 8 for a discussi on on sex-related differences and
their impl ications f or exercise.
Step 1: Exercise Mode
Exercise mode  refers to the specific activity performed by the
athlete: cycling, running, swimming, and so on. When training to
improve aerobic endur ance performance, the athlete should select
activities that mimic as closely as possible the movement pattern
emplo yed in competi tion. This will cause positive adaptations in
specific physiological system s and tissues of the body related to
those used during competi tion. For example, the recruitment of
specific muscle  fibers and the adaptation of the energy systems
within those fibers must be challenged during aerobic endur ance
training. Selecting the appropriate exercise mode during training
ensur es that the systems used in competi tion are challenged to
improve. Note that the more specific the training mode is to the
sport, the greater the improvement in performance is likely to be
experienced. For an athlete involved in multiple aerobic endur ance
sports, or one who is interested in a gener al aerobic endur ance
fitness program, cross-tr aining or participation in multiple aerobic
endur ance activi ties ma y be w arranted (47).
Step 2: Training Frequency
Training frequency  refers to the number of training sessions
conducted per day or per week. The frequency of training sessions
depends on an interaction of exercise intensi ty and duration, the
training status of the athlete, and the specific phase of the sport
(e.g., preparation phase or preseason versus competi tion phase or
in-season). Higher exercise intensi ty and longer duration may
necessi tate less frequent training to allow sufficient recovery  from
exercise sessions. The training status of the athlete can influence
1520
training frequency , with lesser -trained athletes requiring more
recovery days at the beginning of a training period than more highly
trained athlete s. The sport phase or season that the athlete is
currently in can also influence training frequency; an off-season
program may include three to four training days per week, but
training frequency may progress to daily workouts (or even multiple
workouts per day for triathletes and highly competi tive distance
runners) in the preseason. Additional ly, fewer training sessions may
be required to maintain an achieved level of physiological function or
performance than to attain that level initially (128). Appropriate
training frequency is important for the aerobic endur ance athlete,
because too much training may increase the risk of injury , illness, or
overtraining (i.e., maximum tolerable dose). While some evidence
shows a positive relationsh ip between exercise frequency and
increased injury rates (63), these studies used active individuals in a
wide age range, not only young and healthy athletes, as subjects.
Additional resear ch has shown injuries are multifactorial and there is
insufficient evidence defini tively associating injuries with increases or
high levels of training frequency, volume, or other training factors
(44). Conversely, too little training will not result in positive
adaptations to the various systems of the body (i.e., below the
minimum effective dose). Resear ch has shown that it is necessary to
train more than twice per week in order to increase V̇O2max (138).
Many strength and condi tioning professionals recogniz e that multiple
training sessions per day may be needed to improve performance in
some aerobic endur ance athletes. For athletes participating in single-
discipl ine sports such as running, such training practices  should be
reserv ed for those with an advanced or elite training status due to
the level of physiological stress involved with such programs.
Resear ch conducted by Hansen and colleagues (58) showed that
time to exhaustion, resting muscle glycogen concentr ations, and
citrate synthas e activity increased among seven healthy untrained
men after 10 weeks of training twice every other day versus once
daily. It was speculated that training in a glycogen-depleted state
1521
may further increase glycogen resynthesis via an increase in the
transcription and transcription rate of certain genes responsible for
training adapta tions. Howev er, the resear chers cautioned that these
results should not necessari ly be used by strength and condi tioning
professionals and practitioners to guide practice, because low
glycogen concentr ations may reduce the period of time an athlete is
able to train and may increase risk of overtraining. This is one
reason why it is important to monitor the effects of the training load
on athletes. Further , strength and condi tioning professionals and
athletes need to understand that adaptation takes place during
periods of rest, and underta king more frequent training can affect
the recovery pr ocess and, ul timately , the lev el of adaptation.
Recovery from individual training sessions is essential if the
athlete is to derive maximum benefi ts from the subsequent training
session. Exercise performance has been shown to improve following
relative rest from difficult training sessions (16). Obtaining sufficient
rest, becoming rehydrated, and restoring fuel sources are critical
issues for the athlete during recovery. Physical and mental relaxation
and avoidance of strenuous physical activity are particularly
important following days of high-intensi ty or long-dur ation training.
Postexercise ingestion of adequate fluids and electr olytes is
important for replacing those lost during training. If the training
session was especial ly long or intense, postex ercise carbohydrate
intake is important for replacing the muscle and liver glycogen stores
that were likely depleted, as is the ingestion of protein to aid muscle
repair and recovery. More detailed information on this topic can be
found in chapter 11 .
Evidence suggests that while most aerobic endur ance athletes
across a variety of sports (e.g., cycling, running, walking, triathlon)
use nutrition, hydration, stretching, and active recovery, other forms
of recovery (e.g., compr ession garments and ice baths) are not used
as frequently or at all (13, 19). In addition, while many athletes
believe in the benefi ts of different recovery strategies for
competi tion, such as active recovery, self-massage, and massage,
1522
they do not actual ly use them (19). Resear ch has further elucidated
that elite athletes are more likely to use all forms of recovery, except
cold water immersion, than lower tiered well-trained athletes (13).
The use of or lack of use of different strategies has been found to be
related to coach and athlete awareness of the effectiveness of such
strategies (13). Further , the majori ty of athlete information and
recommendations about recovery strategies comes from coaches
and fellow athletes rather than peer-reviewed scienti fic publications
(19). Therefore, to maximiz e recovery, and aid performance, it is
important that coaches and athletes are educated and up to date on
the types of recovery strategies that have been shown in multiple
scienti fic publications to be effective, available, and best suited to
athletes in tr aining and competi tion.
With regards to recovery and training, the term recovery
run/ride/swim , which is often used by aerobic endur ance athletes to
reflect an easy run, ride, or swim after competi tion, or a training
session during the training cycle, must be clarified. Typical ly, a
recovery session would fall under the banner of active recovery,
which relates to low-intensi ty physical activities designed to facilitate
recovery from the metabol ic responses of exercise fatigue (72). A
recovery sessio n should be just that: a session with the intentional
purpose of aiding recovery beyond that achiev able via passiv e rest,
which resear ch indicates it does (40). It is not designed to provide
an extra training stimulus and defini tely should not contribute to any
further muscle damage. Therefore, the recovery session should be
short in duration and of a low intensi ty (i.e., zone 1 ([table 21.1]).
Consequently , an extensiv e aerobic endur ance session or long, slow
distance session should not be used as a recovery run, just because
it is of a low intensi ty. Howev er, even though recovery sessions
should not be consider ed as a training stimulus, they do contribute
to the total amount of exercise completed in a training  cycle and
therefore must be included in all training plans for monitoring and
recovery purposes (36).
1523
TABLE 21.1   Example of a Five-Zone Intensity Scale
to Prescribe and Monitor Training of Aerobic
Endurance Athletes
Intensity
zoneV̇O2 (%
max)Heart rate
(% max)Lactate
(mmol/L)Typical accumulated
duration within zone
1 50-60 60-72 0.8-1.5 1-6 h
2 66-80 72-82 1.5-2.5 1-3 h
3 81-87 82-87 2.5-4.0 50-90 min
4 88-93 88-92 4.0-6.0 30-60 min
5 94-100 93-100 6.0-10.0 15-30 min
This scale is typical of intensi ty zone scales used for aerobic endur ance training
prescription and monitoring. The scale was developed by the Norwe gian Olympic
Federation as a gener al guidel ine based on years of testing of cross-country skiers, rowers,
and biathletes.
Reprinted by permission from S. Seiler, “What is Best Practice for Training Intensi ty and
Duration Distribution in Endur ance Athletes?”  International Journal of Sports Physiology
and P erformance  5 (2010): 277 .
Step 3: Training Intensity
Centr al to causing training adaptations in the body is the interaction
of training intensi ty and duration. Gener ally, the higher the exercise
intensi ty, the shorter the exercise duration. Adaptations in the body
are specific to the intensity , or effort expended during a training
session. High-i ntensi ty aerobic exercise increases cardiovascular and
respiratory function and allows for improved oxygen delivery to the
working muscles (105). Increasing exercise intensi ty may also
benefi t skeletal muscle adaptations by affecting muscle fiber
recruitment (85). As exercise intensi ty is increased , greater
recruitment of type II muscle fibers occurs to meet the increased
power needs. This training stimulus allows those fibers to become
more aerobical ly trained, thereby potential ly improving overall
aerobic perf ormance.
The regulation of exercise intensi ty is critical to the success of
each training session and ultimately the entire program. An exercise
1524
intensi ty that is too low does not stress the body’s systems and
induce the desired physiological adaptations, whereas an intensi ty
that is too high results in excessive fatigue and a prematur e end to
the training session. In either instance, the training session will be
poor and inef fective.
The most accurate methods for regulating exercise intensi ty are
to monitor oxygen consumption during exercise to determine its
percentage of V̇O2max and to periodical ly measur e blood lactate
concentr ation to determine the relationship to LT. If V̇O2max
monitoring is not available, exercise prescriptions can use heart rate,
ratings of perceived exertion, metabol ic equiv alents (in clinical
populations), or exercise velocity to monitor exercise intensi ty.
Power-measuring devices are also frequently used by elite and top-
level amateur competi tors, especial ly in cy cling.
Heart Rate
Heart rate is likely the most frequently used method for prescribing
aerobic exercise intensi ty. The reason is the close relationship
between heart rate and oxygen consumption, especial ly when the
intensi ty is between 50% and 90% of functional capacity
(V̇O2max), also called heart rate reserve (HRR ). HRR is the
difference between an athlete’ s maximal heart rate and their resting
heart rate (24). The most common means of regulating intensi ty
using this method is to determine the specific heart rate associated
with the desired percentage of V̇O2max or the heart rate associated
with the LT. For the greates t precision, this necessi tates laboratory
testing to identi fy these exercise intensi ties. If laboratory testing is
unavailable, the individual’ s age-predicted maximal heart rate
(APMHR)  is often used as the basis for determining exercise
intensi ty. While there are numer ous APMHR equations, all of which
are estimates and have been shown to have varying degrees of bias,
the Fox equatio n (APMHR = 220 - age) appears less prone to under -
and overestimation of HRma x in the gener al population (123). It is
important to note, howev er, that the Fox equation is also susceptible
1525
to individual variabi lity with regards to its accuracy, having a
documented standar d deviation of 10 to 12 beats per minute (123).
Refer to the sidebar Target Heart Rate Calculation s for formulas and
sample calcula tions for determining aerobic endur ance exercise
heart rate ranges using the Karvonen method  and the
percentage of maximal heart rate (MHR) method. The
relationship between V̇O2max, HRR, and MHR is shown in table 21.2 .
TABLE 21.2  Relationship Between  V̇O2max, Heart
Rate Reserve (HRR), and Maximal Heart Rate (MHR)
% V̇O2max % HRR % MHR
50 50 66
55 55 70
60 60 74
65 65 77
70 70 81
75 75 85
80 80 88
85 85 92
90 90 96
95 95 98
100 100 100
Although the Karvonen and percentage of maximal heart rate
formulas provide practical intensi ty assignments, basing  them on
APMHR will entail some inaccuracies (vs. laboratory-tested maximal
heart rates) when exercise intensity is monitored (73). It has been
determined that age contributes significantly to the variabi lity in
maximal heart rate; howev er, the effects of other factors such as
mode of exercise and fitness level must also be consider ed with the
use of heart rate to monitor intensi ty (73). Changes in fitness over
1526
time must also be taken into account when prescribing exercise. As
aerobic power (V̇O2max), LT, MLSS, and exercise econom y improve,
the prescribed  absolute intensi ty will be a lower relative intensi ty,
resulting in a lower stress and stimulus. As such, corresponding
adjustments must be made to increase training intensi ty to maintain
a stimulus that will elicit continuing and sustainable adaptations. To
provide accurate information on the magni tude of these
improvements in aerobic fitness, and to inform subsequent
adjustments in training intensi ty, it is important to test athletes
regularly in each of these factors. Refer to chapters 13 and 14 for
information on selecting, administering, and scoring appropriate
validated field and laboratory tests. Additional ly, using estimations of
exercise intensi ty via estimated maximal heart rate equations
provides no information about the intensi ty associated with the LT.
Without some knowledge of an athlete’ s LT, achiev ed from field or
laboratory testing, a highly effective aerobic endur ance training
program cannot be dev eloped.
Target Heart Rate Calculations
Karvonen Method
Formula
Age-pr edicted maximum heart r ate (APMHR) = 220 - age
Heart r ate reserv e (HRR) = APMHR - r esting heart r ate (RHR)
Target heart r ate (THR) = (HRR × ex ercise intensi ty) + RHR
To determ ine the target heart rate range (THRR), calculate THR using both the
prescribed minimum and maximum intensi ty values.
Example
A 30-year-old athlete with an RHR of 60 beats per minute is assigned an exercise
intensi ty of 60% to 70% of f unctional capaci ty:
APMHR = 220 - 30 = 190 beats/min
RHR = 60 beats/min
HRR = 190 - 60 = 130 beats/min
1527
Lowest number of the athlete’ s THRR = (130 × 0.60) + 60 = 78 + 60 = 138
beats/min
Highest number of the athlete’ s THRR = (130 × 0.70) + 60 = 91 + 60 = 151
beats/min
Percentage of Maximal Heart Rate Method
Formula
Age-pr edicted maximum heart r ate (APMHR) = 220 - age
Target heart r ate (THR) = (APMHR × ex ercise intensi ty)
To determ ine the target heart rate range (THRR), calculate THR using both the
prescribed minimum and maximum intensi ty values.
Example
A 20-year-old athlete is assigned an exercise intensi ty of 70% to 85% of maximal
heart r ate:
APMHR = 220 - 20 = 200 beats/min
Lowest number of the athlete’ s THRR = 200 × 0. 70 = 140 beats/min
Highest number of the athlete’ s THRR = 200 × 0.85 = 170 beats/min
It is also important to note that environmental factors such as
heat, humidi ty, and altitude place additional stresses on the body,
affecting the cardiovascular responses to exercise (68, 117). As
such, the acute and chronic effects of these external factors in
elevating heart rate should be taken into account when prescribing
and moni toring ex ercise intensi ty.
Ratings of Perceived Exertion Scales
Ratings of perceived exer tion (RPE)  scales also can be used to
regulate and monitor intensi ty during aerobic endur ance training.
Evidence suggests that RPE can be used to accurately regulate
intensi ty when  there are changes in fitness level (29); howev er,
resear chers have demonstr ated that the RPE–intensi ty relationship
can be influenced by various external environmental factors such as
passiv e distracters and environmental temper ature (93, 130).
According to Haddad, Padula, and Chamari (56), various subject
characteristics such as age, sex, training status, and fitness level
1528
may influence RPE. Furthermor e, a few environmental factors that
may influence RPE are listening to music, watching television or
video, environmental temper ature, altitude, nutritional
consider ations, and external feedback. Howev er, these authors
suggest that despite the potential influence of these factors, RPE is
still a valid moni toring tool ( table 21.3 ).
TABLE 21.3  Sample Rating of Perceived Exertion
(RPE) Scale
Rating Description
1 Nothing at al l (lying down)
2 Extremely l ittle
3 Very easy
4 Easy (could do this al l day)
5 Moder ate
6 Somewhat har d (starting to f eel it)
7 Hard
8 Very har d (making an ef fort to k eep up)
9 Very, very har d
10 Maximum ef fort (cannot go an y further)
Metabolic Equivalents
Metabol ic equiv alents may also be used to prescribe exercise
intensi ty. One metabolic equivalent (MET)  is equal to 3.5 ml ·
kg−1 · min−1 of oxygen consumption and is consider ed the amount of
oxygen required by the body at rest (3). Metabol ic equiv alent values
have been determined for a variety of physical activities; an activity
with a MET value of 10.0 requires 10 times the oxygen uptak e that is
required by an individual at rest. Assigning MET values as part of an
aerobic exercise prescription requires the strength and conditioning
professional to know (or estimate) an athlete’ s maximal oxygen
1529
uptak e to be able to calculate an exercise MET level. However, the
use of METs in exercise prescription is typical ly limited to clinical
populations.
Intensity Measuring Technology
Previously due to cost, power devices for cycling such as power
measuring cranks and hubs to monitor exercise intensi ty were
mostly only used by professionals and top-lev el amateurs. Resear ch
has supported their use from the perspectiv e of demonstr ating that
they provide valid and reliable power measur ement (49). Howev er,
due to the advancements in technology , it is common to see athletes
of all levels using technology to monitor exercise intensity. This
technology ranges from smart watches to running stride power
meters to power measuring cranks. Each technology has its own
reasons for being selected. For example, using power measuring
cranks in cycling has an advantage over other measur es because
metabol ic rate is closely related to mechanical power production
(30). Also, using power as an intensi ty measur e allows reproducible
intensi ty efforts regardless of environmental condi tions, which may
influence other measur es of intensi ty such as heart rate and velocity
(30). Irrespectiv e of the technology selected to monitor power ,
speed, or similar variables, they should have training zones allocated
to them that r eflect the athlete’ s training status.
Technology also extends to advanced indoor trainers such as
treadmi lls, rowers, and ski and cycle ergometers. Due to the large
variety of technological devices currently available, it is not possible
to address each manuf acturer individual ly. Howev er, some common
points to consider are whether the measur ements of power , speed,
stride length, stride frequenc y, and the like are valid, accurate, and
reliable. While a number of these commonly used devices have been
resear ch tested , many have not. Hence, it is important to review the
product before buying. Also, given the number of variables that can
be measured, it is important to set training intensi ty or target ranges
before using them. Additional ly, strength and condi tioning
1530
professionals must understand what each variable actual ly reflects,
how to interpr et it, and how it may change with respect to the
training pr escribed.
Similarly, while an athlete may be familiar with technology , it does
not mean they are used to the specific device measuring their
performance, and as such, a familiarization period may be required.
For example, it can feel foreign to run on a treadmi ll (activ e, passiv e,
or Alter-G) when one has not done so before. As such, coaching
cues need to be developed and provided to the athlete to ensur e he
or she transitions successfully to the new technology or device. It
also should be noted that variances in technology between indoor
and outdoor equipment or differences in performance between
exercising indoors versus outdoors exist and can produce differing
results (90). For example, it has been shown that running inside on
a treadmi ll at slower speeds  can feel easier and produce a lower
exercise heart rate than running outside at higher submaximal
speeds (90). Aerobic endur ance performance was also found to be
superior outside compar ed to when performed indoors. The
resear chers suggest this may be related to a potential fear of falling
from the treadmi ll at higher speeds and the potential build-up of
heat due to the absence of air flow around the body when running
indoors.
Training Zones
It is common practice in aerobic sports to prescribe exercise within
one of a number of training zones, each of which reflects a training
intensi ty and training goal, rather than a specific heart rate or RPE
(62, 120). The number of zones can vary, typical ly from three to
seven; howev er, the common reference point is often the athlete’ s
lactate or ventilatory threshold. A low-intensi ty or aerobic training
zone can be associated with a stable blood lactate concentr ation
below 2 mmol/L with one or more high-intensi ty or anaer obic
training zones above 4 mmol/L, and lactate threshold training can be
seen as attaining and mainta ining steady state lactate levels in the
1531
zone between 2 mmol/L and 4 mmol/L (120). Figure 21.1 and table
21.1 (page 697) illustrate examples of three and five zone training
models r espectiv ely.
FIGURE 21.1 A three-intensi ty zone model based on identi fication of ventilatory
thresholds. L T = lactate thr eshold; MLS S = maximal lactate steady state; mM = mmol/L.
Step 4: Exercise Duration
Exercise duration  refers to the length of time of the training
session. The duration of a training session is often influenced by the
exercise intensi ty: the longe r the exercise duration, the lower the
exercise intens ity. For example, exercise that is conducted at an
intensi ty above the maximal lactate steady state (e.g., 85% of
V̇O2max) will have a relatively short duration (20-30 min) because
the accumulation of lactate  within the muscle will contribute to
fatigue. Conversely, exercise that is performed at a much lower
intensi ty (e.g., 70% of V̇O2max) may be performed for several hours
before the athlete experiences f atigue.
1532
The duration of a training session is often influenced by
the exercise intensity; the longer the exercise duration,
the lower the exercise intensity.
Step 5: Exercise Progression
Once athletes begin an aerobic endur ance exercise program, they
need to continue training to either maintain or advance their aerobic
fitness level. Howev er, resear ch indicates that aerobic fitness does
not decrease for up to five weeks when frequency decreases to as
few as two times per week as long as training intensi ty is maintained
(126).
Increasing aerobic endur ance fitness requires program
progression, which initially involves increasing the frequency ,
intensi ty, and duration of exercise. Typical ly, for the gener al
population, it is recommended that from week to week within a
longer -term training plan, exercise frequency , intensi ty, or duration
should not increase more than 10% each week to avoid overtraining
or injury (57). While 10% may not seem like a significant increase,
when these increases and their associated adaptations are added
over a longer period of months and years, the adaptations and
performance improvements are substantial and achiev ed while
minimizing the risks of injury  and overtraining. Howev er, for athletes
preparing for long-distance events, and especial ly those starting
from a low fitness level, it may be necessary to adjust this guidel ine
for a small number of weeks within the larger training plan. It should
be noted that if an increase in training volume above 10% is
implemented, it is critical that before doing so monitoring systems
for physical and psychological overtraining symptoms are determined
and implemen ted on a regular basis to recogniz e indications of
overtraining and possible injury early on. For example, a cyclist
riding 68 miles per week across three sessions may increase their
18-mi le tempo and 18-mi le interv al sessions by 10%, thereby
increasing each session by about 2 miles. Given the relatively high
intensi ty of these training sessions, this would be appropriate.
1533
Howev er, to only increase the remaining extensiv e endur ance
session of 32 miles by 10% would only result in an increase of about
3 miles or, assuming they ride at an average of 18 miles per hour, an
increase of 10 minutes, from 1 hour 46 minutes to 1 hour 56
minutes. Instead, given the low impact and intensi ty of exercise and
the time involved, the duration of this extensiv e endur ance ride may
reasonably and safely be extended by 15 to 20 minutes (i.e., about 6
miles), which would equate to an increase of approximately 20%.
But, as stated pr eviously , this incr ease abo ve the r ecommended 10%
should be done cautiously , with injury and overtraining monitoring
systems implemented, and only for a short period of time with an
appropriate increase in recovery time and techniques reflectiv e of
the increased stress on the body. This type of planned increase in
training frequency , intensi ty, or duration may be referred to as short-
term f unctional o verreaching .
An important point regarding training duration progression is that
it is often recommended to use predicted time to set the duration of
a training session rather than distance. This is because training time
factors in the effects of terrain and environmental condi tions,
whereas distan ce does not. For example, if an athlete runs 10 miles
over a flat course in 1 hour and 10 minutes, and then runs a hilly
11-mi le course the following week in a much slower time of 1 hour
and 58 minutes, even though the prescribed distance only increased
by 10%, the time taken was consider ably greater (+48 minutes =
65% incr ease) which is too much f or a week -to-week pr ogression.
Consequently , discretion needs to be used with respect to which
training variable is increased and by how much. Further , to again
avoid symptoms of overtraining or injury , only one training variable
should be incr eased at a time.
Progression of training frequency may be limited by constr aints
such as school, work, and family commi tments. It may not be
possible for the athlete to train every day or to incorpor ate more
than one training session each day. The duration of each training
session is limited by the same constr aints. In these cases, to elicit
1534
further adaptations, a greater reliance on manipulatin g training
intensi ty exists . Note that as the athlete’ s level of fitness changes
over the course of the sport seasons, training intensi ty levels (e.g.,
heart rate range for a given training zone) must be adjusted.
Similarly, as the training environment changes (e.g., from cool to hot
and humid), RPE charts may be particularly helpful for monitoring
intensi ty in addition to heart rate, which will be elevated by the
increased physiologic demands induced by the environmental
condi tions. In conjunction with these points, progression of training
frequency , intensi ty, and duration, along with recovery, should be
monitored at all times to ensure appropriate periods of loading and
unloading are applied, and signs or symptoms of overreaching or
overtraining are detected early. More detailed information on these
topics can be f ound in chapter 24 .
1535