# Chapter 23: Rehabilitation, Reconditioning, and Medical Issues

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

**PDF Pages:** 1630--1678

CHAPTER  23
REHABILITATION,
RECONDITIONING, AND
MEDICAL ISSUES
Morey J. Kolber, PhD, PT, and William J. Hanney,
DPT, PhD
The authors would like to acknowledge the significant contributions of David H. Potach
and T erry L. Grindstaf f to this chapter .
After completing this chapter, you will be able to
identi fy the members of the al lied heal th team and their
responsibi lities during the r ehabi litation and r econdi tioning of
injured athletes;
recogniz e the t ypes of injuries and medical condi tions that
athletes sustain;
compr ehend the timing and ev ents of tissue heal ing;
understand the goals of each tissue heal ing phase; and
describe the r ole of the str ength and condi tioning pr ofessional
during injury r ehabi litation and r econdi tioning.
As the emplo yment of strength and condi tioning professionals
continues to increase, their role will expand to allow more active
1630
participation in the rehabi litation and recondi tioning of injured
athletes. The strength and condi tioning professional has unique
knowledge and insight regarding optimal athletic function and can
serve a vital role during  the final stages of an advanced
rehabi litation program by preparing the athlete for a return to
competi tion. These abilities give the strength and condi tioning
professional distinct responsibi lities during rehabi litation from athletic
injury . To fully understand how the strength and condi tioning
professional can best augment the rehabi litation of injured athletes,
one must first recogniz e the role of each member of the allied health
team. Furthermor e, an under standing of different types of injury and
the physiological healing process is essential to hastening the
recovery from injury .
This chapter is not intended to provide the reader with
rehabi litation protocols for specific injuries. Rather, the aim is to
explain the physiological events that follow a musculosk eletal injury ,
thereby allowing optimal goal setting by the strength and
condi tioning professional to improve rehabi litation outcomes. The
information in this chapter should ultimately be used to return an
injured athlete to maxim al function. The rehabi litation and
recondi tioning approach follows five basic principles, listed in the
sidebar .
1631
Allied Health Team
The allied health  team provides health care services, with athlete
needs and concerns as the primary focus (15). All members of the
allied health team are responsible for educating coaches and
athletes regarding injury risks, precautions, and treatments; they
must also prevent injuries and rehabi litate those athletes  who have
sustained injury. Several different professionals play important roles
in assisting the injured athlete’ s return to the playing field,
necessi tating ef fective communication.
Principles of Rehabilitation and
Reconditioning
Healing tissues must not be o verstressed.
The athlete must fulfill specific criteria to progress from one phase to another
during the r ehabi litative process.
The rehabi litation program must be based on current clinical and scienti fic
resear ch.
The program must be adaptable to each individual and his or her specific
requirements and goals.
Rehabi litation is a team-oriented process requiring all the members of the
allied health team to work together toward a common goal of returning the
athlete to unr estricted competi tion as quickly and saf ely as possible.
Allied Health Team Members
The team physician  provides medical care to an organization,
school, or team. The team physician is most often a medical doctor
(MD) or doctor of osteopath y (DO). The team physician may have
special ized training (residency or fellowship) in a variety of fields,
including family medicine, internal medicine, pediatrics, and
orthopedics (67) but should be proficient in the care of
musculosk eletal injuries and sport-related medical condi tions (32).
Specific responsibilities of the team physician may include
1632
preparticipation examinations , on-field emergency care, injury and
illness evaluati on and diagnosis, and referral to other health care
professionals as needed (67). Although not responsible for daily
rehabi litation, the team physician most often makes the final
determination of an athlete’ s readiness for return to competi tion (31,
67). Another important role of the team physician is the prescription
of medications as needed, including anti-inflammatory , pain, and
cold and flu medications.
The person typical ly responsible for the day-to-da y physical health
of the athlete is the athletic train er or athletic therapist. In the
United States, an athletic trainer is certified by the National Athletic
Trainers’ Association Board of Certification as a Certified Athletic
Trainer (ATC). The athletic trainer works under the supervision of the
team physician and is emplo yed primari ly by secondary schools,
colleges, or professional teams but may also work in an outpatient
physical therapy clinic. Primary responsibi lities of this individual
include manag ement and rehabi litation of injuries resulting from
physical activity and prevention of injuries through the prescription
of sport-speci fic exercise and the application of prophylactic
equipment (e.g., tape and braces). Specifically, the athletic trainer
evaluates injuries, provides the injured athlete with therapeutic
exercise to hasten the rehabi litation process, treats injuries with
therapeutic modal ities, and serves as an administr ator for the allied
health team (15). Because the athletic trainer has a significant
amount of contact with the athlete, he or she plays a key role in
promoting communication between members of the allied health
team, the coach, and the athlete (15).
A physical therapist  (or physiotherapist ) with special ization
in orthopedics or sport physical therapy can play a valuable role in
reducing pain and restoring function to the injured athlete. Although
physical therapists are typical ly based in outpatient physical therapy
clinics, many collegiate and professional teams now directly emplo y
physical therapists as members of the allied health staff. A physical
therapist may help develop specific treatment strategies or manage
1633
long-term rehabi litation. In the United States, physical therapists
with expertise in sport injury management or orthopedics may
become board certified through the American Board of Physical
Therapy Special ties (ABPT S) and obtain the Sports  Certified
Special ist (SCS) or Orthoped ic Certified Special ist (OCS) credentials,
respectiv ely. These board-certified special ists are more commonly
becoming participants in the evaluation, treatment, and
rehabi litation of acutely injured athletes and often serve in the dual
capaci ty of team athletic tr ainer and ph ysical ther apist.
The strength and conditioning  professional  typically focuses
on strength, power , and performance enhancement. The strength
and condi tioning professional also plays a valuable role within the
allied health team and is an integr al part of the rehabi litation and
recondi tioning process. Ideally, this person should be certified by the
National Strength and Condi tioning Association as a Certified
Strength and Condi tioning Specialist (CSCS) to ensur e that he or she
has the knowledge and backgr ound to contribute to the
rehabi litation process. In consul tation with the athletic trainer or
physical therapist, this professional uses an understanding of the
proper technique and application of several types of exercise (e.g.,
resistance, plyometric, and aerobic exercise) to develop a
recondi tioning program to ready the injured athlete for return to
competi tion. Furthermor e, strength and condi tioning professionals
possess an extensiv e understanding of the role that biomechanics
play in a wide variety of sports and activities, which may allow them
to suggest exercises for advanced rehabi litation and recondi tioning
of man y injuries.
Additional ly, the allied health team often includes special ized
members who assist with the postacute rehabi litation and
recondi tioning of injured athletes. An exercise physiologist  has a
formal backgr ound in the exercise sciences and uses his or her
expertise to assist with the design of a condi tioning program that
carefully consid ers the body’s metabol ic response to exercise and the
ways in which that reaction aids the healing process. Because proper
1634
nutrition is crucial in recovery from injury , a nutritionist  or a
register ed dietitian with a backgr ound in sport nutrition may provide
guidel ines regarding proper food choices to optimiz e tissue recovery.
Ideally, the nutritionist has been formal ly trained in food and
nutrition scienc es and may be a register ed dietitian (RD) recogniz ed
by the Academ y of Nutrition and Dietetics Commission on Dietetic
Registr ation (15). A licensed counselor , psychologist , or
psychiatrist  with a backgr ound in sport may provide strategies that
help the injured athlete better cope with the mental stress
accompan ying an injury .
Communication
Communication between members of the allied health team is
essential (15, 97). Most often the injured athlete has the most
contact with coaches, the athletic trainer, and the strength and
condi tioning professional. In some instances, athletes disclose the
initial onset of an injury to a sport coach or strength and
condi tioning professional before consul ting with the athletic trainer.
Thus consistent communication between these individuals is
imper ative. This does not negate communication with other
members of the allied health team (physician, physical therapist,
nutritionist, sport psychologist) who may not have as frequent
interactions over the course of a week. A weekly meeting of the
allied health team can provide a forum so all members are able to
discuss the training requirements and necessary restrictions for each
injured athlete. Relevant questions for discussion could include the
following: What is the current status of the athlete (no participation,
limited participation, full participation)? What exercises or activities is
the athlete currently performing? Are any restrictions or
modifications necessary? How is the athlete progressing? Do any
program changes need to be made?
To develop training programs most effectively for an injured
athlete, the strength and conditioning professional must understand
the diagnosis of the given injury and exercise indications and
1635
contraindications. An indication  is a form of treatment required by
the rehabi litating athlete. For example, a softbal l outfielder with
shoulder impingement must maintain lower extremity function, so
the athletic trainer may request that the athlete continue to perform
lower extremity strength, speed, agility, and power exercises during
shoulder rehabi litation. Therefore, lower body exercise is indicated.
A contraindication  is an activity or practice that is inadvisable or
prohibited due to the given injury . For example, during the later
phases of rehabi litation from an anterior shoulder dislocation, an
American footbal l player may require upper body strengthening
before being cleared to play. The athletic trainer requests that the
athlete initiate upper body strengthening, but the bench press
exercise may be contraindic ated because it can place the injured
shoulder in a vulner able position in the presence of anterior
instabi lity. To clarify the role of the strength and condi tioning
professional during this process, it may be beneficial to have the
allied health team use a form that specifies the indications and
contraindications for exercises, providing for safe and efficient
condi tioning (figure 23.1). Additional ly, the strength and condi tioning
professional can use a similar form (figure 23.2) to communicate the
components of a given program and the athlete’ s subjectiv e and
objectiv e responses to those components.
The allied health team includes a large number of
professionals working together to provide an optimal
rehabilitation and reconditioning environment. Thus, the
relationship of the allied health team members requires
thoughtful communication to ensure a safe, harmonious
climate for the injured athlete.
1636
Types of Injury
Macrotrauma  is a specific, sudden episode of overload injury to a
given tissue, resulting in disrupted tissue integri ty. Trauma to the
bone can lead to either a contusion or a fracture. Skeletal fractures
can result from a direct blow to a bone and can be given a variety of
classifications (e.g., closed, open, avulsed, incomplete). Joint trauma
is manifested as either a dislocation  (complete displacement of the
joint surfaces) or a subluxation  (partia l displacement of the joint
surfaces) and may result in joint laxity or instabi lity. Ligamentous
trauma is termed a sprain  and is assign ed a classification of first
degree (partial tear of the ligament without increased joint
instabi lity), second degree (partial tear with minor joint instabi lity),
or third degr ee (complete tear wi th full joint instabi lity).
Rehabilitation Referral
Date:  January 2, 2026
Name:  Allison Pierson                      Sport and posi tion: Volleybal l setter
Injury date:  November 21, 2025      Sur gery date:  December 4 , 2025
Diagnosis:  Left ACL r econstruction
Indications
Stationary bicy cle: Progress gr adual ly up to 60 minutes. No running at this time.
Single-leg hip sled: Less than 90 degrees of left knee flexion; begin without
resistance; pr ogress only after consul tation wi th athletic tr aining staf f.
Upper extr emity resistance ex ercises
Contraindications
Leg extension ex ercise
Full squats
Plyometrics
Running
Jonah Gr ey, ATC     January 2, 2026
FIGURE 23.1  A sample r ehabi litation r eferral form, which communicates indications and
contraindications to al lied heal th team members.
1637
Musculotendinous trauma is classified as either a contusion  (if
the trauma was direct) or a strain (if the trauma was indirect). A
muscle contusion is an area of excess accumulation of blood and
fluid in the tissues surrounding the injured muscle; it may severely
limit the function of the injured muscle. Muscle strains  are tears of
muscle fibers and are further assigned grades, or degrees. A first-
degree strain is a partial tear of individual fibers and is characteriz ed
by strong but painful muscle activity. A second-degr ee strain is a
partial tear with weak, painful muscle activity. A third-degr ee muscle
strain is a complete tear of the fibers and is manifested by very
weak, painless muscle activity. A tendon, like a muscle, can also
ruptur e if the tensile load applied to it exceeds its limit. Typical ly,
tendon collagen fibers are significantly stronger than the muscle
fibers to which  they attach, so failure is more likely to occur within
the muscle belly, at the musculotendinous junction, or at the tendon
attachment to the bone than wi thin the substance of the tendon.
Microtrauma , or overuse injury , results from repeated, abnormal
stress applied to a tissue by continuous training or training with too
little recovery time. Overuse injuries may be due to training errors
(e.g., poor program design and excessiv e volume), suboptimal
training surfaces (e.g., too hard or uneven), faulty biomechanics or
technique during performance, insufficient motor control, decreased
flexibi lity, or skeletal malal ignment and predisposi tion (86, 97). Two
common overuse injuries involve bone and tendon. The most
common overuse injury to bone is a stress fracture. Although body
type and structur e, nutrition, and metabol ic factors play a large role,
stress fractures are often the result of a rapid increase in training
volume or excessiv e training volume on hard training surfaces (4,
97). Tendinitis  is inflam mation of a tendon (83), and if the cause of
the inflammation is left uncorr ected, chronic tendini tis or
tendinopath y may develop. (A term with the suffix -itis refers to an
inflammatory condi tion [e.g., tendini tis and arthri tis].)
Tendinopathy  is a degener ative condi tion characteriz ed by minimal
1638
inflammation, tendon cell damage or death, and
neovascularization  (83).
Strength and Conditioning Summary
Date:  October 23, 2025
Name:  Molly Jackson
Sport:  Soccer
Position: Midfield
Diagnosis:  Grade II right MCL spr ain
Injury date:  October 9, 2025
Activity Summary
Number of sessions:  7
Date begun:  October 16, 2025
Current Activities
Activity Sets Reps Resistance (lb)
Half squat 3 10 115
Leg extension 3 10 60
Leg flexion 3 10 50
Heel r aise 3 15 95
Time Speed
Stationary bicy cle 20 min 80 rpm
Stair stepper 20 min 70 ft per min
Jogging 10 min 5.0 mph
Assessment
No difficulty with hal f squats; ma y incr ease squat depth to thr ee-quarters.
Suggestions
Increase squat depth; incr ease jogging speed and time.
Jill Michaels, CSCS      October 23, 2025
FIGURE 23.2  A sample str ength and condi tioning summary f orm, which r ecords the
athlete’ s curr ent activi ties and r esponses to those activi ties.
1639
Tissue Healing
The process of returning to competi tion following injury involves the
healing of the injured tissues and the preparation of these  tissues for
the return to function. To better understand the role of the strength
and condi tioning professional during rehabi litation and
recondi tioning, it is necessary to review the gener al phases of tissue
healing following musculosk eletal injury (34, 36). The timing of the
events occurring within each phase of tissue healing differs for each
tissue type and is affected by a variety of systemic and local factors,
including age, lifestyle, degree of injury , comorbidi ties, and the
structur e that has been damaged. Moreover, the phases  of healing
progress along  a continuum with no defini tive timelines. Howev er, all
tissues f ollow the same basic pat tern of heal ing (table 23.1 ).
TABLE 23.1  Tissue Healing
Inflammatory response phase
 Pain, swel ling, and r edness
Decreased col lagen synthesis
Increased number of inflammatory cel ls
Fibroblastic repair phase
 Collagen fiber pr oduction
Decreased col lagen fiber or ganization
Decreased number of inflammatory cel ls
Maturation–remodeling phase Proper col lagen fiber al ignment
Increased tissue str ength
The process of returning to competition following injury
involves healing of the injured tissues, preparation of
these tissues  for the return to function, and use of
proper techniques to maximize rehabilitation and
reconditioning.
1640
Inflammatory Response Phase
Inflammation  is the initial reaction to injury (34, 36) and is
necessary for normal tissue healing to occur. Both local and systemic
inflammation occur during the inflammatory response  phase ,
allowing the eventual healing and replacement of damaged tissue.
During the inflammatory phase, several events transpire that
contribute to both tissue healing and an initial decrease in function.
The injured area becomes red and swollen due to changes in
vasculari ty, blood flow, and capillary permeabi lity. After tissues are
damaged, a locally hypoxic environment leads to a certain amount of
tissue death that allows the release of several chemical mediators,
including histamine and bradykinin. These substances further
increase blood flow and capillary permeabi lity in this local area,
thereby promoting edema and fluid accumulation into the
surrounding tissues. Edema  elevates intraarticular pressure, which
inhibi ts the motor neurons required for muscle activation (22, 84).
Thus, edema can lead to muscle weakness and atrophy as well as
limited function (22, 59). Tissue debris and pathogens (i.e.,
infectious agents) are removed from the injured area by increased
blood flow and a process called phagocytosis ; phagocytosis involves
macrophages (i.e., a type of white blood cell), which engulf cellular
debris to speed tissue healing. Additional ly, fibroblast cells in nearb y
tissues are activated and begin to migrate toward the injury site to
assist with healing. At this time, macrophages and platelets within
the injured area release growth facto rs that assist in the transition
to the fibr oblastic r epair phase (see next section).
The inflamma tory substance s present during this phase may
result in stimulation of pain receptors (i.e., nociceptors), causing the
injured athlete to sense pain, further contributing to decreased
function. This phase typical ly lasts 72 hours following an acute injury
but may last longer with a compr omised blood supply and more
severe structur al damage. Though the inflammatory phase is critical
to tissue healing, if it does not end within a reasonable amount of
1641
time, the phases that follow may not occur, thereby delaying the
rehabi litation pr ocess.
Fibroblastic Repair Phase
Once the inflammatory phase has subsided, tissue repair  begins
(34, 36); the fibroblastic repair  phase, also known as the
proliferative phase , is characteriz ed by catabol ism (tissue
breakdown) and replacement of tissues that are no longer viable
following injury . In an attempt to improve tissue integri ty, new
capillaries and connectiv e tissue (scar tissue) form in the area.
Fibroblasts from the inflamm atory phase, with the help of growth
factors, begin to synthesiz e type III collagen, which is randomly
deposi ted along the injured structur e and serves as the framework
for tissue regener ation. This newly formed tissue is weaker than the
original tissue; thus optimal strength of the new tissue is not yet
achiev ed. Collagen fibers are strongest when they lie longitudinal ly
(i.e., parallel) to the primary  line of stress, yet many of the new
fibers are positioned transversely , which limits their ability to
efficiently transmit force. This phase of tissue healing begins as early
as 72 hours after injury and ma y last up to two months.
Maturation–Remodeling Phase
The matur ation–r emodel ing phase of healing often overlaps with the
fibroblastic reparative phase and may begin as early as a few weeks
after injury . During the maturation–remodeling  phase of healing
the weakened tissue produced during the repair phase is
strengthened (34, 36). During this phase, new collagen fibers have
shifted to a stronger type I collagen, allowing the newly formed
tissue the opportuni ty to improve its structur e, strength, and
function. With increased loading, the collagen fibers of the newly
formed scar tissue (a collection of cells and collagen that have
repaired damaged tissue) begin to hypertr ophy and align themselv es
along the lines of stress (29). The thicker and more optima lly aligned
collagen fibers become stronger , allowing a return to function.
1642
Although strength of the collagen fibers and healing tissue improves,
this tissue is not as strong as the normal healthy tissue it has
replaced. Tissue remodeling  in the matur ation–r emodel ing phase
can last months to y ears after injury (34 , 36, 54).
Following injury, all damaged tissues go through the
same genera l phases of healing: inflammation, repair,
and remodeling. The timing of the events occu rring
within each phase of tissue healing differs for each
tissue type and is affected by a variety of systemic and
local factors, including age, lifestyle, degree of injury,
comorbidities, and the structure that has been
damaged. Characteristic events define each phase and
separate one phase from another.
1643
Goals of Rehabilitation and
Reconditioning
The strength and condi tioning professional must consider both the
athlete’ s subjective response to injury and the physiological
mechanisms of tissue healing; both are essential in relation to an
athlete’ s return to optimal performance. The process of returning to
competi tion following injury involves healing of the injured tissues,
preparation of these tissues for the return to function, and use of
proper techniq ues to maximiz e rehabi litation and reconditioning.
While the goal is often a rapid resumption of activity, it is important
to remember that each athlete responds differently to injury and
thus pr ogresses uniquely during r ehabi litation.
As a preface to discussion of the goals of treatment during injury
rehabi litation, two points must be made. First, healing tissue must
not be overstressed (70). During tissue healing, controlled
therapeutic stress is necessary to optimiz e collagen matrix formation
(8, 29), but too much stress can damage new structur es and
significantly slow the athlete’ s return to competi tion. This means
choosing a level of loading that provides neither too much stress nor
too little stress to the athlete ’s healing tissue. It should be obvious
that when one is choosing the load, it is necessary to consider the
phase of healing and athlete type. For example, an exercise that
provides too little tissue loading during the matur ation– remodel ing
phase may provide too much  loading (increased tissue stress) during
the inflammatory response phase. Further , an exercise that provides
too little stress to a professional basketball center may be excessiv e
for an amateur cross country runner . The plane of movement is
another necessary consider ation. As an example, the medial
collateral ligament of the knee is subject to the greatest stress when
loaded in the frontal plane (i.e., valgus stress) during terminal knee
extension. Therefore, if the athlete has a medial collateral ligament
injury , frontal plane movemen ts (valgus stress) such as a lateral box
1644
jump or a side (lateral) shuffle should be avoided during early
healing phases. Howev er, those frontal plane movements should
probably be included in some f orm during the later phases.
Second, the athlete must meet specific objectiv es to progress
from one phase of healing to the next (98, 99). These  objectiv es
may depend on range of motion, strength, or activity. It is the
responsibi lity of the team physician, athletic trainer, physical
therapist, or a combination of these professionals to establ ish these
guidel ines.
Healing tissu e must not be overstressed, but controlled
therapeutic stress is necessary to optimize collagen
matrix formation. The athlete must meet specific
objectives to progress from one phase of healing to the
next.
Inflammatory Response Phase
The first response to an injury is inflammation, a reaction that is
essential for subsequent healing but also important to manage
properly so as to not r etard the r ehabi litation pr ocess.
Treatment Goal
The primary goal for treatment during the inflammatory response
phase is to prevent disruption of new tissue. A healthy environment
for new tissue regener ation and formation is essential for preventing
prolonged inflammation and disruption of new blood vessel and
collagen production, which can prolong the injury . Relative rest from
strenuous activity and physical agents  (e.g., modal ities) including
ice, compression, elevation, and electrical stimulation are often
primary treatment options to minimiz e tissue damage and decrease
acute pain, but results on efficacy have been mixed (63, 93). One
important consider ation is that evidence has shifted from the
Protection Rest Ice Compr ession Elevation (PRICE) approach to the
Protection Optimal Loading Compr ession Ice Elevation (POLICE)
1645
approach for the managemen t of injuries in the inflammatory stage
of healing as a result of improved outcome measur es and faster
recovery (5, 20).
It is also impor tant to realize that a quick return to functio n relies
on the health of other body tissues. Therefore, the power , strength,
and endur ance of the musculosk eletal tissues and the function of the
cardiorespiratory system must be maintained. The strength and
condi tioning professional can provide significant knowledge and
expertise in this area. To accompl ish these tasks, the strength and
condi tioning professional should consul t with the athletic trainer to
determine which types of exercises are indicated and contraindicated
for the specific injury . Maximal protection of the injured structur es is
the primary goal during this phase. Assuming that this requirement
is fulfilled, exercises may include gener al aerobic and anaer obic
training and resistance training of the uninjur ed extremities. If
movement of the injured limb is not contraindicated, isolated
exercises that target areas proximal and distal to the injured area
may also be permissible provided that they do not stress the injured
area. Examples include hip abduction and external rotation exercises
following a knee injury (24, 39, 65) or scapula-stabi lizing exercises
following a shoulder injury (57 , 94, 100).
To Ice or Not to Ice
Ice applications, also referred to as cryotherapy , have been used for centuries to
decrease pain and inflammation following an injury (51). Advancements in
cryotherapy methods from ice packs or ice massage and cold-water immersion to
more advanced devices such as continuous cooling systems, vapor and gaseous
sprays, and total body cooling have emerged, providing numer ous application
options. As part of the POLICE method for the management of acute injuries,  early
pain-f ree movemen t and ice are emphasiz ed (5, 20). Howev er, the use of ice has
been questioned in both the strength and condi tioning and allied health
professions due to the potential for delaying natural post-injury healing processes
and impeding muscle performance (52). These concerns, largely unsupported in
the literature, stem from the potential of ice to cause a vasoconstriction of blood
vessels (45), which  may limit the ability of healing agents to reach the site of
injury . While this concern is reasonable, there is no evidence that icing alone
1646
following an injury may impede healing in human subjects. Contr adictory evidence
exists to determi ne if reductions in muscle performance occur following
cryotherapy (31, 41).
Evidence pertaining  to cryotherapy after injury has supported a pain-r elieving
analgesic effect via reduced nerve conduction velocity, with additional benefi ts that
include a suppr ession of the inflamma tory response with the potential to reduce
swelling and enhanced return to sport (6, 31, 35, 37, 51, 96). Following exercise,
evidence supports the use of cryotherapy to reduce symptoms of delayed onset
muscle soreness (DOMS); howev er, systemic reductions in insulin-like growth
factor (IGF) and protein synthesis may occur, impairing recovery (23, 73, 96).
Thus, cryotherapy is recommended in the acute inflammatory stage as part of the
POLICE strategy (20). A 15-minute duration is adequate when ice packs, ice
massage, and cold-water immersion are used (31). Cold-water immersion (<59 °F
[<15 °C]) is a more efficient option when a larger coverage area is needed (e.g.,
whole hand or ankle) and is likely to have a greater effect on cooling deeper tissue
(31). Local cryotherapy applications beyond the acute inflammatory phase are not
warranted. Although cryotherapy may reduce DOMS and be effective when rapid
recovery is needed, routine use is not recommended because it may impair protein
synthesis (23).
Exercise Strategies
Although a rapid return to competi tion is often a goal, protectiv e
loading, also known as active rest, of the injured area is initially
necessary to safeguar d the damaged tissue from additional injury .
Therefore, painful or intense exercise directly involving or stressing
the injured area is not recommended during this phase. Exercises
that do not directly involve or stress the injured area (e.g., upper
extremity exercises for lower extremity injury , single-leg  exercises
with the uninvolved limb) and pain-f ree active movement of the
involved area of injury ma y still be perf ormed.
Fibroblastic Repair Phase
After the inflammatory response phase, the body begin s to repair
the damaged tissue with similar new tissue; howev er, the resiliency
of this new tissue is low at this time. Repair of the weakened injury
site can take up to eight weeks if the proper amount of restorative
stress is appl ied, or longer i f too much or too l ittle str ess is appl ied.
1647
Treatment Goal
The treatment goal during the fibroblastic repair phase is to prevent
excessiv e muscle atrophy and joint deterior ation of the injured area.
In addition, a precarious balance must be maintained in which
disruption of the newly formed collagen fibers is avoided but low-
load stresses are gradual ly introduced to allow increased collagen
synthesis and prevent loss of joint motion. To protect the new,
relatively weak collagen fibers in the early reparative phase, the
athlete should avoid active resistiv e exercise involving the damaged
tissue and may opt for submaximal activities such as functional
movements against gravity or isometric resistance. Too little activity,
though, can also have a deleterious effect, because newly formed
fibers will not optimal ly align and may form adhesions (abnormal
collection of cells and collagen that lack pliability), thereby
preventing full motion. Early protected motion hastens the optimal
alignment of collagen fibers and promotes improved tissue mobility.
As in the inflammatory phase, therapeutic modal ities are permissible,
but their goal during repair is to promote collagen synthesis and
manage pain. Ultrasound, electrical stimulation, and ice are
continued in order to support and hasten new tissue formation (40,
82). Again, maintenance of muscular and cardiorespiratory function
remains essential for the uninjur ed areas of the body. The strength
and condi tioning professional has consider able expertise to offer the
other members of the allied health team regarding selection of the
appropriate activities. Possible exercise forms during the repair
phase include strengthening of the uninjur ed extremities and areas
proximal and distal to the injury, aerobic and anaer obic exercise, and
improving str ength and neur omuscular contr ol of the in volved areas.
Exercise Strategies
The following exercises should be used during the repair phase only
after consul tation with the team physician, athletic trainer, or
physical therapist. Isometric exercise may be performed , provided
that it is pain free and otherwise indicated by the physician or
1648
athletic trainer. Submaximal isometric exercise allows the athlete to
maintain neuromuscular function and improve strength with
movements performed at an intensi ty low enough that the newly
formed collagen fibers are not disrupted. Unfortunately , isometric
strengthening is joint angle specific; that is, strength gains occur
only at the angles used (46). Therefore, if indicated, it may be
appropriate for the athlete to perform isometric exercises at multiple
angles (46). Isokinetic exercise uses equipment that provides
resistance to movement at a given speed (e.g., 60°/s or 120°/s).
Because sport is not performed at a single consistent speed,
isokinetic exercise may be limited in real-world application as a
standalone exercise. Furthermor e, most isokinetic equipment allows
single-joint exercise only, which permi ts concentr ation on a specific
muscle or joint but is not always the most functional method of
strengthening. While isokinetic machines may have a more limited
application in terms of strengthening specificity, these devices may
be of value for providing continuous passiv e motion early in the
post-injury or post-operative phases of healing and can be used to
assess muscle balance or ratios (e.g., quadriceps-to-hamstring
strength r atio).
While isotonic exercise (i.e., concentric and eccentric) involves
movements with constant external resistance, the amount of force
required to move the resistance varies, depending primar ily on joint
angle and the length of each agonist muscle. Isotonic exercise uses
several different forms of resistance, including gravity (i.e., exercises
performed without equipment, with gravitational effects as the only
source of resistance), dumbbells, barbel ls, and weight stack
machines. Concentric and eccentric muscle actions can be used to
increase strength and appropriately stress healing tissues . Eccentric
exercise allows for greater force production and requires less energy
expendi ture compar ed to concentric exercise and has been shown to
promote healing or tissue repair via the concept of
mechanotransduction  (44, 61). Mechanotr ansduction occurs
when tissues are subject to overload, which communicates a
1649
mechanical message from the extracellular to intracellular region of
the tissue. This mechanical message upregulates the cellular DNA,
which in turn stimulates collagen synthesis (44). Loads may be
increased to provide greater challenge as tissue healing progresses.
The speed at which the movement occurs is controlled by the
athlete; movement speed can be a program design variable, with
more acute injuries calling for slower movement and the later
phases of healing better suited to faster, more sport-speci fic
movement.
Neuromuscular control  is the ability of muscles to respond to
sensory feedback to maintain joint stability (85). This sensory
information is referred to as proprioception  and occurs in response
to receptors in the skin, muscles, tendons, ligaments, and the joint
capsule. Proprioception contributes to the consc ious and
unconscious efferent control of postur e, balance, stability, and sense
of position (85). For example, when running on an uneven surface,
cross country runners rely on sensory input (proprioception) from
their lower extremities to adjust to the ground to prevent falls and
injuries. After an injury , neuromuscular control is usually impair ed
due to arthrogenic inhibition , which occurs from swelling within
the joint that causes a reflex inhibi tion of the alpha motor neuron
responsible for muscle activation (22). Specific types of exercises
exist to improve neuromuscu lar control following injury and can be
manipulated through alterations in surface stability, vision, and
speed. Mini-tr ampol ines, balance boards, and stability balls can be
used to create unstable surfaces for upper and lower extremity
training. Athletes can perform common activities such as squats and
push-ups on uneven surfaces to improve neuromuscular control.
Exercises may also be performed with eyes closed, thus removing
visual input, to further challenge balance. Finally, increasing the
speed at which exercises are performed provides additional
challenges to the system. Specifically controlling these  variables
within a controlled environment that is sport or activity specific will
1650
allow the athlete to progress to more challenging exercises in the
next stage of heal ing.
Maturation–Remodeling Phase
The outcome of the repair phase is the replacement of damaged
tissue with collagen fibers. After those fibers are laid down , the body
can begin to remodel and strengthen the new tissue, allowing the
athlete to gr adual ly return to f ull activi ty.
Treatment Goal
The primary goal during the matur ation–r emodel ing phase is to
optimiz e tissue function while transitioning to return to play or
activity. Athletes improve function by continuing and progressing the
exercises performed during the repair phase and by adding more
advanced, sport-speci fic exercises that allow progressive stresses to
be applied to the injured tissue. The athlete can be tempted to do
too much too soon, which may further damage the injured tissues. It
is important to remember that, while there may be less pain with
activity at this point, the injured tissues have not fully healed and
require further attention to achiev e complete recovery (figure 23.3).
Progressive tissue loading allows improved collagen fiber alignment
and fiber hypertr ophy (8, 30). Return-to-pla y or activity decisions
should be based on an understanding of normal tissue healing time
frames as well as a criteria-based progression with predetermined
objectiv es. These objectiv es usually include measur es of range of
motion and strength, functional testing, and patien t-reported
function using establ ished patient -reported outcome forms (1, 57,
100). It is important for the allied health team members to
communicate, have clearly defined roles, and use return-to-pla y
metrics to ensur e a saf e return to pla y.
1651
FIGURE 23.3 Profile of a typical soft-tissue injury response. Pain is often used as a guide
for tissue health. Pain levels (blue line) often decrease well before tissue healing (yellow
line) is complete, which may lead athletes to inappr opriately believe adequate tissue
healing has oc curred (vertical y ellow line) and i t is saf e to r esume f ull activi ty.
Exercise Strategies
Ultimately , as with other aspects of strength and condi tioning,
rehabi litation and recondi tioning exercises must be functional and
must mimic activity demands—that is, reflect specificity. Examples of
functional ly specific training include joint angle–speci fic
strengthening, velocity-speci fic muscle activity, closed kinetic chain
exercises, and exercises designed to further enhance neuromuscular
control. Strengthening should transition from gener al exercises to
sport-speci fic exercises designed to replicate movements common in
given sports. For example, for a basketball guard who sprained an
ankle, rehabi litation exercises may progress from a gener al single-
joint exercise to those more specific to the sport and position (figure
23.4). Specificity of movement speed is another important program
design variable. Strengthening exercises performed during
rehabi litation should also mimic sport speed requirements; that is,
activities that require greater speeds (e.g., sprinting) should include
exercises performed at higher velocities. Using the example in figure
23.4, the exercises progress from the relatively slow and controlled
balance and strength exercises to the faster plyometric and sprinting
1652
exercises. Similarly, consider a sprinter with a hamstring muscle
strain. Whereas initial reconditioning may concentr ate on the
recovery of flexibi lity and strength of the injured muscles, the nature
of this athlete’ s sport necessi tates exercises performed at rapid
speeds during the later phases of rehabi litation and recondi tioning.
Exercise select ion for a sprint er with an improving hamstring muscle
strain might progress from hamstring flexibi lity to eccentric strength
to concentric strength to dynamic stretching and finally to rapid
isotonic strengthening. Exam ples of velocity-speci fic exercise include
manual ly resisted strengthening and plyometric and speed training.
Refer to chapters 19 and 20 for a thorough discussion of plyometric
and speed tr aining, r espectiv ely.
1653
FIGURE 23.4 Sample progression for a basketball player with a goal of returning from an
ankle spr ain. Ex ercises pr ogress from gener al to bask etball speci fic.
The kinetic chain is the collective effort or involvement of two or
more sequential joints to create movement (88). A closed kinetic
chain  exercise is one in which the terminal joint meets with
consider able resistance that prohibits or restrains its free motion
(88); that is, the distal joint segment is stationary (e.g., fixed to the
1654
ground). Lower extremity closed kinetic chain exercises have often
been classified as a more functional form of exercise than open
kinetic chain exercises (2, 94) because most sport-related activities
are performed  with the feet “fixed” to the playing surface. For
example, during the closed kinetic chain squat exercise, the feet are
“fixed” to the floor and essential ly do not move, providing  a base on
which movement occurs (figure 23.5a). Closed kinetic chain
exercises have several advantages, including increased joint stability
and functional movement patterns; during sport activity, joints are
not typically used in isolation but rather work in concert with the
adjacent joints  and surrounding musculatur e. Although closed kinetic
chain exercises are commonly viewed as lower extremity exercises,
closed chain upper extremity exercises exist as well (figure 23.5b)
(57, 100).
1655
FIGURE 23.5  Closed kinetic chain ex ercises:  (a) squat ex ercise and  (b) push-up ex ercise.
An open kinetic chain  exercise uses a combination of
successiv ely arranged joints in which the terminal joint is free to
move; open kinetic chain exercises allow for greater concentr ation
on an isolated joint or muscle (2). An example is the leg (knee)
extension exercise, during which the feet and lower legs are allowed
to move freely (figure 23.6). The leg extension allows greater
concentr ation on the quadric eps at the knee joint; in comparison,
the squat, which also uses the quadriceps muscles and knee joint,
relies on muscl e activity on the hip and ankle joints as well. Although
closed kinetic chain exercises are often viewed as more functional,
1656
most activities involve both closed and open kinetic chain
movements. In sprinting, for example, while one lower extremity is
on the ground (closed kinetic chain), the other is in the air (open
kinetic chain), which means that both types of movement can occur
simultaneously . In some situations, an open chain exercise may
therefore be an equal ly appropriate choice. Some examples of upper
extremity open kinetic chain activities include the biceps curl and
bench pr ess ex ercises.
FIGURE 23.6  Example of an open kinetic chain ex ercise—leg (knee) extension ex ercise.
Exercises designed to improve neuromuscular control, which were
introduced during the repair phase, should be continued and
progressed as appropriate during the matur ation–r emodel ing phase.
Rehabi litation and recondi tioning goals and strategies are
summariz ed in the sidebar .
1657
Rehabilitation and Reconditioning Goals
and Strategies
Although rehabi litation and recondi tioning programs must be individual ized, the
following ar e lists of gener al goals and appr oaches f or each phase.
Inflammatory Response Phase
Prevention of new tissue disruption and prolonged inflammation with the use
of relative rest and passiv e modal ities
Maintenance of function of the cardiorespiratory and surrounding
neuromusculosk eletal systems
No activ e exercise for the injur ed area
Fibroblastic Repair Phase
Prevention of excessiv e muscle atrophy and joint deterior ation of the injured
area
Maintenance of function of the neuromusculosk eletal and cardiorespiratory
systems
Possible exercise options: submaximal isometric, isokinetic, and isotonic
exercise; balance and pr oprioceptiv e training activi ties
Maturation–Remodeling Phase
Optimization of tissue f unction
Progressive loading of the neuromusculosk eletal and cardiorespiratory
systems as indicated
Possible exercise options: joint angle–speci fic strengthening, velocity-speci fic
muscle activity, closed and open kinetic chain exercises, proprioceptiv e
training activi ties
1658
Program Design
The area in which strength and condi tioning professiona ls can best
contribute to the rehabi litation and recondi tioning process is the
provision of resistance and aerobic training programs designed for
the injured athlete. Their experience in prescribing exercise for
uninjur ed athletes gives strength and condi tioning professionals the
ability to properly adapt training programs for those recovering from
injury . Although protocols do exist for exercise prescription following
injury , many do not incorpor ate sport-speci fic program design
variables; the same principles  used to design resistance and aerobic
training programs for uninjur ed athletes should be applied during
rehabi litation and r econdi tioning.
Resistance Training
Several programs have been developed to assist with the design of
resistance training programs (16, 21, 47, 89, 104), and many of
these programs have been advocated for use in the rehabi litation
setting (16, 47, 104). Both the DeLorme (16) and Oxford (104)
programs use 3 sets of 10 repetitions with a pyramid-t ype design.
DeLorme’ s program progresses from light to heavy resistance. The
initial set involves 10 repetitions of 50% of the athlete’ s 10-repetition
maximum (10RM), the second set increases the resistance  to 75% of
the 10RM, and the final set requires 100% of the 10RM  (16, 17).
The Oxford system (104) is the reverse of DeLorme’ s system; that is,
it progresses from heavy to light resistance. The first set performed
is 100% of the athlete’ s 10RM , the second is 75% of the 10RM, and
the third is 50% of the 10RM (104). Unlike the DeLorme system,
which has a built-in warm-up from progressive increases in
resistance, the Oxford system begins with heavy resistanc e. Thus, a
non-fatiguing w arm-up set should be consider ed.
Knight ’s (47) daily adjustable progressive resistive exercise
(DAPRE)  system requires and allows more manipulation of intensi ty
and volume than either the DeLorme or the Oxford system (16, 17,
1659
104); DAPRE involves 4 sets, with repetitions ranging from 10 to
possibly only 1 during the final set. The first set requires 10
repetitions of 50% of the estimated 6RM, and the second set
requires 6 repetitions of 75% of the estimated 6RM. The third set in
the DAPRE requires the maximum number of repetitions of 100% of
the estimated 6RM; the number of repetitions performed during the
third set determines the adjustment made in resistance for the
fourth set (table 23.2) (48). The DeLorme, Oxford, and Knight
systems are protocols that have been shown to increase muscle
strength (17, 48, 104) and may be appropriate when one is
designing rehabilitation resistance training programs. Howev er,
athletes require rehabi litation  and recondi tioning programs tailored
to the demands of their respective sports. Although these protocols
(17, 48, 104) are establ ished strengthening programs, they may be
too strict to al low individual ization f or athletes in di fferent sports.
TABLE 23.2  Resistance Adjustments for Daily
Adjustable Progressive Resistance Exercise (DAPRE)
Protocol
Number of repetitions
performed during set 3Adjusted resistance for
set 4Resistance for next
exercise session
0-2 Subtr act 5-10 lb (2.3-4 .5
kg)
and repeat the set—
3-4 Same r esistance or
subtract 5 lb (2.3 kg)Same r esistance
5-7 Same r esistance Add 5-10 lb (2.3-4 .5 kg)
8-12 Add 5-10 lb (2.3-4 .5 kg) Add 5-15 lb (2.3-6.8 kg)
13+ Add 10-15 lb (4 .5-6.8 kg) Add 10-20 lb (4 .5-9.1 kg)
Adapted by permission from K. L. Knight, “Knee Rehabi litation by the Daily Adjustable
Progressive Resistiv e Exercise Techniq ue,” American Journal of Sports Medicine  7, no. 6
(1979): 336-337 , Copyright © 1979. R eprinted b y Permission of Sage Publ ications.
1660
Programs for both the healthy and the damaged tissues of an
injured athlete require the same basic design principles provided in
chapter 18. According to the specific adaptation to imposed
demands (SAID) principle, the system will adapt to the demands
placed on it. Therefore, the goal of training (speci fic adaptation)
should dictate the design of the resistance training program
(imposed demands). For example, during the remodel ing phase of
an injured marathoner ’s patellofemoral rehabi litation, his or her
quadriceps muscles should be trained with an emphasis on muscular
endur ance. Therefore, the athlete should perform many repetitions
of the rehabi litation exercises to prepare the muscles for the
demands of long-distance running. Conversely , a weightl ifting
athlete rehabi litating from the same injury requires fewer repetitions
of high-intensi ty rehabi litation and recondi tioning exercises during
the later portions of the remodeling phase to prepare the muscles
for the power demands of this sport. Refer to table 23.3 for a
compar ative example of the rehabi litation strategies for these two
athletes.
Aerobic and Anaerobic Training
Although resear ch has yet to determine an optimal aerobic training
program for use in the rehabilitation setting, it is gener ally accepted
that the program should mimic specific sport and metabol ic demands
as closely as possible. The strength and condi tioning professional,
having a backgr ound in designing and implementing conditioning
exercises for healthy athlete s, is the ideal member of the allied
health team to prescribe and supervise the aerobic training portion
of the injured athlete’ s recondi tioning program. As with the
resistance training program, the strength and conditioning
professional must consider the demands that the given sport places
on the injured athlete. Keeping these demands and the
contraindications of the injury in mind, the strength and condi tioning
professional can use the prescription guidel ines in chapters 17 and
1661
20 to create an appropriate training program to allow an
uncompl icated r eturn to competi tion.
TABLE 23.3  Application of Design Principles for
Resistance Training Programs During Rehabilitation
and Reconditioning From Patellofemoral Injury
Phase of
healingDesign
variableAthlete
Marathon runner Weightlifter
Inflammatory
response
phaseGoals and
exercisesNone that r equire
quadriceps activi ty—relative
rest of this ar ea needed to
reduce inflammation
Maintenance of muscular
strength and endur ance of
adjacent ar eas (i.e. , hip
extensors, knee flex ors, and
plantar flex ors)
Maintenance of
cardiovascular fi tnessNone that r equire
quadriceps activi ty—
relative rest of this ar ea
needed to r educe
inflammation
Maintenance of muscular
strength and power of
adjacent ar eas (i.e. , hip
extensors, knee flex ors,
and plantar flex ors)
Maintenance of upper
body muscular str ength
and power
Fibroblastic
repair phaseGoals and
exercisesIsometric quadriceps
strengthening at f ull knee
extension (pr ogressing to
multiple angles)
Progress to pain-f ree
isotonic quadriceps
strengthening (f ollowing
consul tation wi th sport
medicine team)
Continue ex ercise of
adjacent ar eas
Continue aer obic ex ercise;
may begin stationary
bicycle or stair stepper (per
recommendation of sports
medicine team)Isometric quadriceps
strengthening at f ull
knee extension
(progressing to mul tiple
angles)
Progress to pain-f ree
isotonic quadriceps
strengthening (f ollowing
consul tation wi th sport
medicine team)
Continue ex ercise of
adjacent ar eas
Continue upper body
muscular str ength and
power ex ercises
Sets ×
repetitions2-3 × 15-20 3-4 × 8-10
1662
Intensi ty Submaximal (≤50% 1RM) Submaximal (≤50% 1RM)
Matur ation–
remodel ing
phaseGoals and
exercisesBegin mor e sport -speci fic
activities, mo vements, and
speeds
Return to running, gr adual ly
increasing distance and
speed as toler ated
Add lunge and squat
(increase knee r ange of
motion as able)Begin mor e sport -
specific activi ties,
movements, and speeds
Increase mo vement
speeds to those simi lar
to competi tion
Add R omanian deadl ift
and squat (incr ease
knee r ange of motion as
able)
Sets ×
repetitions2-3 × 15-20 4-5 × 3-8
Intensi ty Progress to maximal intensi ty
(50%-75% 1RM)Progress to maximal
intensi ty (>75% 1RM)
Again consider rehabi litation from a patellofemoral injury for a
marathon runner , a wrestler, and a weightl ifter; the metabol ic energy
demands of their rehabi litation and recondi tioning are markedly
different. For the marathon runner ’s goals, aerobic fitness is of much
greater concern and must be addressed immediately . The metabol ic
demands for the wrestler involve a combination of aerobic and
anaer obic systems; therefore, interv al training is more appropriate
(27). In contrast, the weightl ifter’s program would focus on
maintaining anaer obic fitness. Selecting the appropriate training
device depends on the region of the body that is injured. While
specificity of training is important, gains in exercise capaci ty can be
made through exercise of other body regions (i.e., upper extremity
exercise to improve oxygen consumption) (92). A variety of options
exist to modify aerobic and anaer obic training, including the upper
body ergomete r, deep- water running, lower extremity cycling, and
elliptical machines. Strategies to maintain cardiovascular fitness can
be implemented early, even during the inflammatory  response
phase. As already emphasiz ed, it is important to remember that to
allow optimal healing, attempts should be made to initially minimiz e
stress to healing tissues, but relevant stresses can be applied to
1663
uninjur ed areas. An example  would be for a soccer player with an
acute right knee injury . Although options for right lower extremity
strengthening may be initially limited, exercises may still be
performed for the upper extremity as well as the uninvolved left
lower extremity (e.g., single-leg squat with weights). The strength
and condi tioning professional may need to modify uninvolved left
lower extremity exercises to ensur e that the involved right lower
extremity is protected. Exercises targeting the uninvolved limb can
improve muscl e strength in the involved limb (55, 56). Thus it is
important for injured athlete s to continue to perform strength and
condi tioning ex ercises f or the unin volved body r egions.
Designing strength and conditioning program s for
injured athle tes requires the strength and conditi oning
professional to examine the rehabilitation and
reconditioning goals to determine what type of program
will allow the quickest return to competition.
1664
Reducing Risk of Injury and Reinjury
In addition to using strength training and condi tioning strategies
when rehabi litating athletes from injuries, strength and condi tioning
professionals can implement resear ch findings to reduce both risk for
initial injury and risk of reinjury following injury (77, 90). Structur ed
programs have been developed for the lower (25, 28, 33, 76) and
upper extremities (57, 101). These programs are often sport specific
and addr ess common risk f actors f or injury .
Previous injury  is one of the most substantial risk factors for
future injury in active individuals (30, 75, 86, 91). Risk factors for
upper extremity injury include decreased glenohumer al range of
motion, scapular dyskinesis (i.e., abnormal scapular movement), and
decreased shoulder strength (9, 13, 101). Among overhead athletes,
shoulder internal rotation range of motion restrictions have been
shown to increase the risk for shoulder injury , whereas shoulder
external rotation and flexion range of motion restrictions are
associated with elbow injuries (7, 11, 42). Range of motion exercises
and the Throwers Ten are often used as a structur ed program to
reduce upper extremity injury risk (102). The Throwers Ten program
includes a specific set of upper extremity exercises and movements
designed to improve muscle performance as required for throwing
activities (26). Additional exercises shown to reduce the risk of upper
extremity injury among athletes include strengthening the shoulder
external rotators (figures 23.7a, b) and stretching the shoulde r to
improve internal rotation (figures 23.8a, b) (14, 49, 64, 66, 78). Risk
factors for lower extremity injury include decreased balance,
decreased neuromuscular control during jump landing, and
decreased lower extremity muscle strength (3, 53, 103). Structur ed
lower extremity programs to reduce injury risk should be sport
specific and should focus on neuromuscular control during activities
such as landing from a jump and cutting. Two exercises that may be
used to reduce  this risk of injury to the lower extremities are proper
jumping and landing technique during plyometric exercise (figure
1665
23.9a) and a single-leg squat to emphasiz e unilateral strength
(figure 23.9 b, c).
Previous injury is one of the most substantial risk
factors for future injury in active individuals. Lower
extremity programs designed to reduce injury risk
should be specific to a sport’s demands and should focus
on the neuromuscular control required during specific
activities such as landing from a jump and cutting.
While upper extremity injury  risk-reduction programs exist (102),
much of the resear ch has focused on the prevention  of lower
extremity injuries, specifically anterior cruciate ligament (ACL)
injuries. Two examples of structur ed programs designed to reduce
injury risk are Sportsmetric s (33) and PEP (Prevent Injury and
Enhance Performance) (62). While using slightly different foci, each
of these programs introduces exercises and movements shown to
address risk factors for injury and reduce lower extremity injury
rates, especial ly ACL injuries  and ankle sprains (25, 28, 33, 76). In
addition, using eccentric exercise has been shown to dramatical ly
reduce the risk of hamstring injury (74 , 79).
After return to sport, individuals may continue to demonstr ate
deficits in strength, biomech anics, and functional performance (71,
87). Defici ts may often be compared to the contralater al limb (60) or
establ ished normativ e values (19, 38). Side-to-side differences of
less than 10% in strength and functional performance may be
consider ed acceptable (60). The transition between supervised
rehabi litation for an injury and unrestricted activity participation is a
critical time when members of the allied health team need to be in
communication regarding how deficits in strength and performance
will be managed.
1666
FIGURE 23.7 Shoulder external rotator strengthen ing may be used to reduce shoulder
injuries and impr ove shoulder f unction and stabi lity: (a) start posi tion and  (b) end posi tion.
FIGURE 23.8 The sleeper stretch is used to reduce shoulder injuries, improve shoulder
internal r otation, and r educe posterior shoulder tightness;  (a) front view and  (b) top view .
1667
Medical Conditions
Strength and condi tioning professionals must have an understanding
of medical condi tions that may develop from training as well as
preexisting condi tions that may increase the risk of an adverse event
from exercise. Possessing this knowledge is essential for ensuring
safe participation in exercise and appropriate discontinuation
procedur es. Recognizing the early presentation and management
strategies for rhabdom yolysis, sickling from the sickle cell trait, and
temper ature-induced illnesses are a necessary requirement for
training both the athletic and gener al populations.
Rhabdomyolysis
Rhabdomyolysis  is characteriz ed by the breakdown of skeletal
muscle tissue, leading to the release of myoglobin  into the
bloodstr eam. Myoglobin can pose a risk to kidney function,
potential ly causing kidney damage or failure if left untreated. Various
factors can trigger rhabdo myolysis, including trauma, extreme
physical exertion, and muscle compr ession. The severity of
rhabdom yolysis ranges from mild muscle discomf ort to severe, life-
threatening complications (43). Symptoms of rhabdom yolysis may
manifest as severe muscle pain and weakness, dark urine (often
resembl ing cola, properly termed myoglobinuria ), swelling,
tenderness of affected muscl es, alongside fatigue, nausea , vomiting,
and confusion. In severe instances, individuals may experience
dehydration, electr olyte imbalances, and acute kidney injury (43).
If rhabdom yolysis is suspected, immediately discontinue activity,
lie the client down, implement proper hydration protocols, and
closely monitor to ensur e stability while awaiting further medical
assistance (10). Prompt referral to a medical professional is
necessary to pr event mor e serious medical compl ications (10).
1668
FIGURE 23.9 Two exercises that may be used to reduce risk of injury to the lower
extremities are (a) proper jumping and landing technique during plyometric exercise and (b,
c) a single-leg squat to emphasiz e unilateral strength.
1669
Prevention of rhabdom yolysis is best achiev ed by proper exercise
prescription. Avoidance of excessiv e or unaccustomed exercise
intensi ty, volume, and duration as well as consider ation of baseline
fitness levels before engaging in new exercise serves as a key
preventativ e measur e.
Sickle C ell Trait
The sickle cell trait  (SCT ) is an inheri ted condi tion char acteriz ed by
one abnormal hemoglobin gene and one normal hemoglobin gene.
Individuals with SCT may experience compl ications akin to sickle cell
disease under specific circumstances like extreme physical exertion
or low oxygen levels (72). Unlike sickle cell disease , which
necessi tates inheri ting two abnormal genes, SCT carriers usually do
not exhibi t severe symptoms. In situations such as high-altitude
training environments or extreme exertion where oxygen levels are
low, the red blood cells can change to an abnormal shape (sickling)
and begin to clump together , which ultimately may be responsible
for constrictio n of the blood vessels. When sickling and the
associated vascular occlusion occurs, reports of fatigue or tiredness,
pain, swelling of hand and feet, and vision problems may occur (69).
Longer term consequences of sickling include damage to the blood
vessels; a shorter life span of existing red blood cells, leading to
anemia; and, in cases of vascular occlusion, stroke. Evidence
suggests that the SCT is associated with sudden death during
periods of extreme exertion  and is more common among young
African Americ ans (69). A majori ty of deaths attributed to the SCT
have occurred during military training and athletic participation at
the col legiate lev el (69).
Should an individual develop symptoms of sickling, they should
immediately discontinue physical activity and be removed from
extreme temper ature environments. Owing to potential dehydration,
proper hydration protocols should be implemented immed iately (95).
Immediate referral to a medical professional is indicated if acute
symptoms ar e present.
1670
Key prevention strategies for SCT involve awareness of triggers
for sickling, education, preventive measur es, and regular medical
follow-up. Testing for SCT is recommended among athletes and
those engaged in intense training because SCT has been associated
with sudden death in individuals during extreme exertion. Intense
physical activity should be approached with caution, especial ly in
extreme condi tions or high altitudes, to reduce the potential for
sickling (81). For individuals with the SCT who engage in exercise
training, proper climate acclimatization, training intensi ty
consider ations to stay at or below the anaer obic threshold, and an
active cool-down to promote lactate clearance will serve as a
reasonable pr eventativ e strategy (68, 80).
Heat Cramps
Heat cramps are part of a continuum of heat-related injuries or
illnesses marked by dysregulation of the body’s thermor egulation
capaci ty (58). Heat cramps  are muscle spasms or involuntary
sustained contractions of large muscle groups that may occur when
the athlete is exposed to elevated environmental temper atures
during exercise. Heat cramps may occur during or shortly after
exercise. Several factors may contribute to heat cramps, including
dehydration, depleted electr olytes, increased training  load or
duration, and muscular fatigue. Although heat cramps gener ally
occur in hot environments, elevated core body temper ature is not
always present.
When heat cramps are suspected, immediate cessation of activity
and moving the athlete to a cooler environment to lower body
temper ature is a necessi ty. Implementing proper rehydration is
essential as are appropriate cooling measur es. Passive gentle
stretching or massage to affected muscle groups may be beneficial
(58). Heat cramps may be prevented by proper hydration protocols,
use of light-weight clothing when exercising in hot environments,
and appropriate progressive condi tioning in the specific training
environment to al low heat ac climation (58).
1671
Heat Syncope
Heat syncope  occurs when an athlete experiences dizziness or
lightheadedness and faints during or immediately after training (12).
Heat syncope may occur during positional changes or with prolonged
positioning during exercise in hot environments. Risk factors for heat
syncope include training in hot environments without prior heat
acclimation, dehydration, pooling of blood in the venous system, and
low blood pressure (58). When syncope is suspected or fainting
occurs it is important to lay the athlete in a supine position and
elevate the legs above the level of the heart. If fainting has
occurred, monitoring of vital signs and shielding of the body from
direct heat exposur e is recommended. Once appropriate, proper oral
rehydration is necessary . Prevention strategies include proper
acclimation to training in hot environments and ensuring proper
hydration before, during, and after training. If low blood pressure or
frequent syncope occurs despite preventativ e efforts, medical
consul tation is necessary .
Heat Exhaustion
Heat exhaustion  is the inability to effectively exercise in the heat.
Numer ous factors contribute to heat exhaustion including low blood
pressure, dehydration, lack of acclimation to exercise in hot
environments, heavy sweating, and electr olyte depletion  (12, 58).
Symptoms of heat exhaustion include inability to continue exercise,
pallor, heat cramps, weakness, syncope, dizziness, headache,
hyperv entilation, nausea, diarrhea, acute loss of appeti te, decreased
or dark urine output, and elevated core temper ature up to 104.9 °F
(40.5 °C) (12, 58).
If heat exhaustion is recogniz ed, immediately remove the athlete
from the hot environment and, once appropriate, restore oral
rehydration. If oral rehydration is not possible due to nausea,
parenteral (non-or al method such as intravenous) rehydration may
be consider ed (58).
1672
Aggressive cooling measur es should be implemented such as
forced air conduction or spraying of lukewarm water to cool the body
(58). In cases where these measur es are not effective, total body
cooling in an ice bath may be indicated (12). It is important to
immediately respond to symptoms of heat exhaustion to avoid
progression to heatstr oke.
Prevention strategies include proper acclimation to training in hot
environments and ensuring proper hydration before, during, and
after tr aining.
Heatstroke
Heatstroke , a progression of heat exhaustion, is consider ed a
medical emer gency (12, 58). Heatstr oke occurs f rom intense or long-
term exercise and is characteriz ed by body temper ature
dysregulation greater than heat exhaustion. Signs and symptoms of
heatstr oke include rapid heart rate, hypotension, sweating with
possible evaporation of sweat by time of incident, hyperv entilation,
altered mental state, diarrhea, seizur e, and coma (12, 58).
Immediate recogni tion of heatstr oke is vital to preventing lethal
consequences; core body temper atures in excess of 109.4  °F (43 °C)
have been associated with death. Immediate total body cooling
measur es must be implemented such as total body immersion in ice.
Monitoring of core body temper ature is paramount to appropriately
responding to heatstr oke. Contacting emergency medical services is
indicated in cases wher e medical staf fing is not pr esent.
Prevention strategies include proper acclimation to training in hot
environments and ensuring proper hydration before, during, and
after training. A key elemen t of prevention resides in recognizing
that heat illness exists on a continuum of events all related to
dysregulation of the body’s thermor egulatory capaci ty. As such,
heatstr oke is likely to be preceded by heat cramps, syncope, and
heat exhaustion. Recognizing the presentation of heat cramps or
heat exhaustion bef ore heatstr oke is par amount to pr evention.
1673
Cold Exposure
Cold exposur e, or hypothermia , occurs when the body’s
temper ature drops below 95 °F (35 °C), causing the physiological
systems to reduce functions and eventual ly shut down (18, 50).
While mild hypothermia is manageable, more severe forms are a
medical emergency . Hypothermia affects all organ systems, and
early symptoms include shivering; pale, dry skin; and increased
muscle tone (18). Increased heart rate, blood pressure, and
respiration may also be present as the body attempts to promote
thermogenesis (18). Risk factors for hypothermia include exercising
in cold temper atures without adequate warming methods as well as
exposur e to rain or cold water that results in wet clothing, which
may promote f urther heat loss.
Upon recognizing symptoms of cold exposur e, immediate
measur es for warming the body are required through environmental
temper ature and use of clothing. Monitoring body temper ature is a
necessi ty once hypothermia is recogniz ed; core tempe rature less
than 89.6 °F (32 °C) ma y lead to car diovascular f ailure (18).
It is importa nt to recognize that although the body can
acclimate to training in hot conditions, there is little to
no acclimation to training in cold environments.
Prevention strategies include recognizing extremes in
temperature exposure and use of protective clothing to
help create a warming effect while training.
1674
Conclusion
Effective athletic injury rehabi litation and recondi tioning require
efficient communication between the members of the allied health
team. Each member plays a distinct role in ensuring the injured
athlete’ s return to function; although the job of each professional is
different, the tasks of each team member complement those of the
others on the team. Goals are establ ished for each athlete, and
therapeutic exercise programs must be designed, adminis tered, and
progressed according to the tissue healing sequence. The program
must be individual ized to effectively return the athlete to normal
function and competi tive athletics. Early rehabi litation for initial
tissue protection and strengthening is more structur ed than later
rehabi litation phases; the latter allows for progression to functional
activities that are specific to the athlete’ s sport and position.
Designing reconditioning programs for injured athletes necessi tates
a careful examination of the sport requirements and a thorough
understanding of both the heal ing pr ocess and ther apeutic ex ercise.
KEY TERMS
allied heal th
arthrogenic inhibi tion
athletic tr ainer
closed kinetic chain
contraindication
contusion
counselor
cryotherapy
daily adjustable pr ogressive resistiv e exercise (DAPRE)
dislocation
edema
exercise ph ysiologist
fibroblastic r epair
1675
growth f actors
heat cr amps
heat exhaustion
heatstr oke
heat syncope
hypothermia
indication
inflammation
inflammatory r esponse
macrotrauma
matur ation–r emodel ing
mechanotr ansduction
microtrauma
neovascularization
neuromuscular contr ol
nutritionist
open kinetic chain
physical agent
physical ther apist
physiother apist
proprioception
psychiatrist
psychologist
remodel ing
repair
rhabdom yolysis
sickle cel l disease
sickle cel l trait (SCT )
sprain
strain
strength and condi tioning pr ofessional
subluxation
team ph ysician
tendini tis
1676
tendinopath y
STUDY QUESTIONS
  1.  F ollowing an acute ankle sprain, which of the following
measur es should be imme diately implemented to enable
prompt r ecovery?
  a.  POLICE
  b.  PRICE
  c.  avoidance of ice
  d.  a voidance of ankle mo vement
  2.  Which of the following management strategies is
recommended when heatstr oke occurs?
  a.  passiv e stretching of lar ge muscle gr oups
  b.  total body ice bath immersion
  c.  supine posi tioning wi th the legs elev ated abo ve the heart
  d.  dir ect exposur e to forced air conduction
  3.  F ollowing injury , which of the following healing factors are
responsible f or releasing gr owth f actors?
  a.  fibr oblasts
  b.  platelets
  c.  histamine
  d.  br adykinin
  4.  Which of the following condi tions presents with myalgia,
weakness, and m yoglobinuria?
  a.  sickle cel l trait
  b.  heat cr amps
  c.  rhabdom yolysis
  d.  tendinopath y
  5.  Which of the following strategies has been associated with
enhancing collagen synthesis and preventing hamstring
strains?
  a.  concentric f ocused power activi ties
  b.  isometric perf ormance at a submaximal lev el
1677
  c.  passiv e stretching
  d.  ec centric f ocused o verload
1678