# Chapter 24: Overreaching, Overtraining, and Recovery

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

**PDF Pages:** 1679--1726

CHAPTER  24
OVERREACHING,
OVERTRAINING, AND
RECOVERY
Andrew C. Fry, PhD, and Bradley C. Nindl, PhD
After completing this chapter, you will be able to
define and di fferentiate o vertraining and o verreaching;
understand the di fference between the pr ocess of o vertraining
and the r esult of the o vertraining syndr ome;
recogniz e contributing f actors to o vertraining and o verreaching;
understand the r ole of al lostatic loading;
realize that not al l decr eases in perf ormance ar e due to
overtraining;
know the ph ysical perf ormances most sensi tive to o vertraining
and o verreaching;
appreciate the ph ysiological, biomechanical, and psy chological
responses and adaptations to o vertraining and o verreaching;
learn about potential str ategies f or avoiding perf ormance
decrements due to o vertraining; and
understand how f unctional o verreaching can be a beneficial
part of an appr opriately designed tr aining pr ogram.
1679
Training for optimum performance is familiar territory for athletes, as
it is for most people. Attaining one’s performance potential often
requires advanced training methods that include phases (i.e., cycles
or blocks) of high training volumes and intensi ties (see chapter 22).
While these training phases can be effective for long-term
performance enhancement, they also run the risk of creating a
training stimulu s that is greater than the recovery capabi lities of the
individual. When this happens, it is called overtraining (OT), and it
contributes to the resulting overtraining syndrome (OTS) . The
problem of overtraining was recogniz ed as far back as 1866 (101),
but the topic of overtraining has received much attention in the
scienti fic literature in recent years, and it is readily appar ent that this
is a complex and often confusing phenomenon (13, 38, 40, 43, 61,
65, 72, 74, 80, 88, 89, 104, 107, 135, 137, 139). Furthermor e, the
issue of overtraining is a problem in areas other than sport, such as
with tactical (i.e., military) personnel (134). A common finding in
many reviews and position stands is that more resear ch must be
performed to understand more fully what overtraining and
overreaching (OR)  is, how it affects the individual, and what
measur es can be taken to avoid this problem. In the present chapter
we will examine the known causes and results of the various stress
responses as they apply primari ly to strength and condi tioning
programs for high performance and will provide possible strategies
to avoid or r emedy o vertraining syndr ome.
1680
Periodization and the General
Adaptation Syndrome
When the total training program is correctly designed and
implemented, the individual can adapt and improve. This can closely
align with Selye’s general adap tation synd rome  (GAS; figure
24.1) (117) . In the GAS paradigm as applied to any biological
system, a stress creates an initial alarm phase, followed by a
resistance phase, and ultimately adaptation. If the stress is too
great, the system is unable to successfully resist the stressor and the
biological system dies. In the context of an athlete and a well-
designed strength and condi tioning program, this sequence initially
produces decreases in performance, followed by performance
recovery, and eventual ly performance improvements. This assumes
that the training program permi ts the athlete to resist the stress;
otherwise, persistent decreases in performance occur. These
performance decrements can be either long term due to
overtraining, or short term due to overreaching (see the
Overreaching Defined section later in the chapter) (93, 108, 125,
126). Therein lies the problem for the strength and condi tioning
professional: how to create the proper overload (i.e., training stress)
and how to correctly adjust the training load to permi t the athlete to
recover and attain enhanced performance. When done correctly, this
process can be part of a well-designed periodiz ed program (see
chapter 22). It must be remember ed that both the GAS and the
concept of periodization are paradigms, or models, and do not
necessari ly have to look exactly like illustrations such as figure 24.1.
Indeed, the validity of the GAS as applied to training (14),
periodization paradigms (130), and the concept that fatigue can
accumulate from resistance exercise programs (63) have been
questioned by some academics. Howev er, the vast majori ty of those
who study overtraining and work in the strength and conditioning
profession recognize the complexi ty of this topic (25). It also must
1681
be acknowledged that our understanding of overtraining and
overreaching is far from complete (88, 89, 135) and requires much
more study. The goal of this chapter is to help the practitioner and
athlete avoid unintended long-term decreases in performance, which
are exactly the opposi te of the intended tr aining goal.
FIGURE 24.1 Relationship between the gener al adaptation syndr ome paradigm and
stages of o vertraining and o verreaching.
Adapted by permission from V.M. Zatsiorsky, W.J. Kraemer, and A.C. Fry, Science and Practice of Strength Training, 3rd
ed. (Human Kinetics, 2021), 180.
One of the biggest challenges when training an individual or a
team is how to get the most from training. If working with athletes
training for maximum performance, this means implementing a
training program that will optimiz e performance for their sport. If
working in a tactical environment (e.g., military, law enforcement,
fire fighter , first responde r), the goal again is to optimiz e
performance for the tasks to be performed. Even for those in the
gener al popula tion who are hoping to optimiz e their health and
fitness, it is sometimes desirable to get the maximum effects from
the training program to satisfy their needs. In each of these
scenarios, the person designi ng the training program will most likely
not be satisfied with mediocr e results but is rather seekin g to obtain
1682
the best results possible despite potential limitations encounter ed.
These limitations can includ e a number of factors such as those
listed in figure 24.2.
Figure 24.2  Possible limiting factors when
designing an optimal strength and conditioning
program.
Time a vailable
Equipment and f acilities a vailable
Sport-speci fic training
Sport go verning body r egulations
Prior tr aining history
Travel and time z ones
Competi tion densi ty
Injury and ph ysical l imitations
Menstrual cy cle
Age
Job
Family demands and schedule
Recreational activi ties
In an effort to maximiz e the training effect, it may be necessary
to include blocks of training  that highly tax the individual in an
attempt to attain the greatest training response possible. Examples
of this can include the high-volume gener al preparation phases
found in many strength and condi tioning programs (see chapter 18
for more details). When implemented correctly, the resulting longer -
term training effect can be quite substantial. But a problem arises
when these phases of training have too high a volume or intensi ty
and are beyond the recovery capaci ty of the individual or team,
which can give way to overtraining. But what exactly is overtraining?
What are the lesser forms of overtraining, referred to as
overreaching ? And how do these differ from a stressful but well-
designed training block? Although the term overtraining  is commonly
1683
used in the sport coaching and strength and condi tioning
professions, we must first define exactly what we ar e talking about.
1684
Overtraining and Overreaching
A number of defini tions of overtraining and overreaching can be
found in the literature; howev er, in many cases the defini tions are
vague or extremely gener al. Some may think the concept of
overtraining is a relatively new topic. Howev er, as previously
mentioned, though not in the context of sport performance, the
issue was recogniz ed as early as 1866 concerning gener al physical
effort. It was stated that “the exertion shall not exceed the powers
of recruitment; and … the recruitment shall be facilitated by
adequate diet and rest” (101). Additional ly, much of the overtraining
literature is based on the seminal work of Hans Selye’s GAS (117),
which is also discussed in chapter 22. In the 1980s and 1990s, sport
scientists and sports medicine clinicians began to recogniz e the
problems of overtraining in sport and began to study and evaluate
this challenge as described in several reviews (13, 38, 72, 74, 80,
104, 126, 129, 139). The f ollowing things had become clear:
Not al l forms of o vertraining ar e identical (72, 129).
Not all types of performance decrements are the same (33,
34, 80, 104).
The contributing factors are variable (13, 38, 72, 80, 104, 126,
129, 139).
Figure 24.3 illustrates the training continuum from no training to
optimum training, which can include stressful training to various
overtraining scenarios. What should be abundantly clear in this
figure is that different sports (i.e., training goals) present different
types of overtraining. Likewise, different types of resistance exercise
also present different pathways to the problem of overtraining and
the resulting OTS. It must be remember ed that when proper training
programs are followed, the training and performance adaptations
can differ consider ably (e.g., a distance runner [aerobic endur ance
sport], wrestler [hybrid sport, both aerobic and anaer obic], or a
shot-putter [anaerobic, strength, and power]). Likewise, the factors
1685
contributing to overtraining for these same three athletes, and the
performance impairments and physiological responses, are also
different (13, 33, 34 , 38, 72, 80, 104 , 126, 138, 139).
Overtraining Defined
Due to the emergence of numer ous attempts to define and
understand overtraining (64, 71), a joint task force on the topic was
convened by the combined efforts of the European College of Sports
Science (ECSS) and the American College of Sports Medicine (ACSM)
(88). The result was their position statement titled “Preventions,
Diagnosis and Treatment of the Overtraining Syndrome” that
presented a consensus defini tion of overtraining and overreaching,
as well as what was scienti fically known about these problems at the
time. This was followed in 2013 by an updated position stand
summarizing what had been learned subsequent to 2006 (89). The
consensus of this working group was to adopt the following
defini tion of o vertraining:
An accumulation of training and/or non-tr aining stress resulting
in long-term  decrement in performance capaci ty with or
without related physiological and psychological signs and
symptoms of maladaptat ion in which restoration of
performance capaci ty may take several weeks or months  (88,
p. 2).
1686
FIGURE 24.3 Training continuum resulting in overtraining for numer ous forms of exercise
and tr aining. RE = r esistance ex ercise; O T = o vertraining; OR = o verreaching.
Adapted by permission from V.M. Zatsiorsky, W.J. Kraemer, and A.C. Fry, Science and Practice of Strength Training, 3rd
ed. (Human Kinetics, 2021), 179.
As can be seen in this defini tion, this is a serious condi tion for the
athlete from which recovery can take a long time, and it greatly
interferes or halts the competi tion training program. Since this
defini tion was proposed, more recent working groups have added
their definitions to the literature, as well as concerns with the state
of the overtraining resear ch (65, 135) that have helped illustrate the
challenges of understanding this phenomenon.
An important aspect of this defini tion that was also clarified in
these position stands is that overtraining is actual ly the process
(e.g., excessiv ely high volumes and intensi ties of training) that then
can result in an overtraining syndr ome (i.e., the collection of
symptoms and performance impairments) (figure 24.4) (88, 89). To
be overtrained, one actual ly has the OTS and the required long-term
performance impairments (i.e., weeks to months or longer).
Performance impairments are necessary for overtraining to have
occurred. Howev er, we will see that not all performance impairments
are alike.
1687
FIGURE 24.4 Overtraining is the process, and the overtraining syndr ome is the result. In
all instances, perf ormance impairment of some t ype wi ll be one of the r esults.
Overtraining is the process that can result in an
overtraining syndrome.
Overtraining Syndrome Defined
When the ECSS-ACSM Task Force defined overtraining (88, 89), they
specifically stated that the OTS was a combination of “related
physiological and psychological signs and symptoms of
maladaptation, ” some of which may not be part of the training
program. As such, the use of the term syndr ome indicat es the
complex nature of the condi tion and the fact that the symptoms are
associated wi th each other .
1688
A major challenge to understanding overtraining and its causes
and effects are the numer ous different terms found in the literature.
This is one reason several groups have developed position stands
(88, 89) and consensus statements (65) that include suggested
terminology . Likewise, many symptoms of an overtraining syndr ome
can vary between individuals and between di fferent types of training.
Howev er, it is important to note that in all cases, performance is
impair ed in some manner . Figure 24.5 lists a numbe r of the terms
used in the l iterature for overtraining and i ts effects.
Figure 24.5  Terminology commonly used for
overtraining, the overtraining syndrome, and
related topics.
Overtraining
Overreaching
Functional o verreaching
Nonfunctional o verreaching
Overtraining syndr ome
Stagnation
Overwork ed
Overstressed
Burnout
Overfatigued
Excessiv e fatigue
Imbalance of work and r ecovery
Underr ecovered
Failure to adapt
Stressful training syndr ome
Unexplained underperf ormance
Underperf ormance
Staleness
Maladaptation
Chronic f atigue
Adapted b y permission f rom V.M. Zatsiorsky , W.J. Kraemer , and A.C. Fry , Science
and Pr actice of Str ength T raining , 3rd ed. (Human Kinetics, 2021), 178.
1689
Resear ch on the OTS some times identi fies two types of OTS
related to the autonomic nervous system , specifically the
sympathetic overtraining syndrome  (some times referred to as
SOTS) and the parasympathetic overtraining syndrome
(sometimes referred to as POTS) (126). First presented by Israel in
1976 (61), these syndr omes were named based on how the
autonomic nerv ous system r esponded to the tr aining str esses.
Parasympathetic Overtraining Syndrome
Initially named the Addisonoid syndrome  since it is often
accompanied by decreased concentr ations of the stress hormone
cortisol, this condi tion is characteriz ed by the predominance of
parasympathetic activity. In gener al, the parasympathetic
overtraining syndr ome is most often found in aerobic endur ance
athletes where very large training volumes are common. Diagnosing
parasympathetic overtraining syndr ome in aerobic endur ance
athletes can be tricky since decreased resting heart rate (HR rest) is
typical ly a sign of beneficial cardiovascular adaptations to a training
program (e.g., decreased resting HR). Howev er, in this case, the
decreased HR in already highly trained individuals is due to a
parasympathetic overtraining  syndr ome and the prerequisi te training
program. It should be noted that the parasympathetic overtraining
syndr ome does not cause the performance impairments, but rather
is a collection of symptoms typical ly resulting from the huge training
volumes often used by aerobic endur ance athletes. Some of the
classic studies of the parasympathetic overtraining syndr ome can be
found in the work of Manfred Lehmann and his resear ch team’ s
study of extremely large training volumes of middle-distance runners
(80). Many of the results supported the presence of a
parasympathetic overtraining syndr ome (80), and the recovery
period was as long as a year (personal communi cation, M.
Lehmann). The primary symptom of a parasympathetic overtraining
syndr ome, besides decreased performance, is a diminished
sympathetic response (i.e., epinephrine,  or adrenaline ) to
1690
training (78, 80). At times, this has been called adrenal
exhaustion  due to the inability of the adrenal glands to produce
adequate concentr ations of epinephrine.
Sympathetic Overtraining Syndrome
For a number of years, the existence of a sympathetic overtraining
syndr ome was hypothetical, until it was shown in a group of
resistance exercise overtrained subjects (36). It had been
hypothesiz ed that a sympath etic overtraining syndr ome would occur
before development of a parasympathetic overtraining syndr ome,
but enhanced sympathetic activity had never been previously shown
in response to an OT stimulus. The primary characteristic of
sympathetic overtraining syndr ome is an increased epinephrine
response to exercise and training (36, 37, 38, 40, 41, 139).
Eventual ly, the elevated catecholamines  result in a down-
regulation  of their primary receptor in skeletal muscle, β-2
receptors (41, 124). This is believed to be an important part of the
sympathetic overtraining syndr ome and the accompan ying impair ed
contractility of sk eletal muscle in this condi tion.
Overreaching Defined
A lesser form of stressful training than overtraining is called
overreaching (OR)  and is defined as f ollows:
An accumulation of training and/or non-tr aining stress resulting
in short-term  decrement in performance capaci ty with or
without related physiological and psychological signs and
symptoms of maladaptat ion in which restoration of
performance capaci ty may take from several days to several
weeks  (88, 89).
This defini tion is almost the same as overtraining; howev er, the
severity of the condi tion is less, and recovery is faster. It must be
appreciated here that there are multiple degrees of performance
impairment, including two types of overreaching (figure 24.6). The
most subtle type is performance stagnation . While somet imes
1691
stagnated performances have been consider ed a type of overtraining
(13), this is difficult to differentiate from good training programs
since all seriously trained individuals experience periodic plateaus in
performance. Howev er, if stagnation occurs due to an inappr opriate
training load (33), adjustments must be made.
FIGURE 24.6 Different types of performance impairment due to an overtraining
syndr ome. Being overreached or overtrained results in decreased performance. The primary
differences include the recovery times, whether performance is ultimately enhanced, and
the magni tude of other symptoms that oc cur.
Functional Overreaching
Many training programs purposely include micro- or mesocy cles of
greater training  volumes or intensi ties as part of the long-term plan.
Examples of these include preseason training camps for many sports
that include two or three training sessions a day or gener al
preparation training blocks in the strength and condi tioning program.
When properly prescribed, these can be very effective training
1692
methods that prepare the athlete for later performance gains (88,
89, 106, 126). The short-term effect is decrements in performance,
but recovery can be attained within days or weeks and can result in
a super compen sation effect. As such, and although stressful to the
athlete, functional overreaching (FOR)  can be beneficial
provided appropriate recovery is allowed. It should be noted that
functional overreaching is a commonly used training strategy by
many successful coaches. Figure 24.1 on page 778 illustrates how
functional o verreaching can fi t into the GA S paradigm.
Nonfunctional Overreaching
On the other hand, nonfunctional overreaching (NFOR)  is
somewhat similar to functional overreaching with two very important
differences. First, the short-term accumulated fatigue is greater, and,
second, the recovery takes longer (88, 89, 126). In the case of
NFOR, the individual does not experience any super compensation
and is only able to return to his or her baseline performance levels
(see figure 24.1 on page 778) (88, 89, 93, 108, 125, 126). As the
name implies, this type of training does not serve any useful function
since no performance benefi ts result, and the athlete has been
unnecessari ly stressed.
Overtraining and Overreaching Share
Properties With Other Conditions
A number of other problematic condi tions share symptoms and characteristics with
OT and OTS. For example, similarities between OT and the OTS with clinical
depression (4, 5), post-traumatic stress disorder (6), and other relevant
psychological condi tions (53) ha ve been noted.
Additional ly, many characteristics of relative energy deficiency syndro me
(RED-S) , formerly known as the female athlete triad, are similar to symptoms
often found in OTS (122). Although the root causes of each of these illnesses or
diseases may be different from OT and OTS, they can each certainly contrib ute to
an OTS. Both RED-S and OTS can be interr elated since many causes  and
symptoms of each condition contribute to the other. Therefore, when the presence
of RED-S is suspec ted, it is important to clearly discern how overtraining may be
contributing to this problem. To adequately address the serious condi tion of RED-S,
1693
trained professionals need to be involved, but the strength and condi tioning
professional must be able to r ecogniz e when help of this t ype is needed.
1694
Overtraining Continuum
All the different types and severities of overtraining and overreaching
can collectively make an overtraining continuum (figure 24.7).
Although some overlap may exist between each of the categories,
this continuum illustrates how each successiv e level becomes more
serious for the athlete and requires longer and more intense
recovery.
FIGURE 24.7 The overreaching/o vertraining continuum. SOTS = sympathetic
overtraining syndr ome; PO TS = par asympathetic o vertraining syndr ome.
It should be appar ent now that not all forms of overtraining are
identical (28, 126, 129), and the resulting OTS is not a simple
problem with simple solutions. Indeed, it has been repeatedly
reported that many factors contribute to this problem, and whether
it is due to training for aerobic endur ance sports (28, 46) or
resistance exercise (37, 43), it is extremely complex (46, 49, 84, 88,
89, 139) and multidiscipl inary (75, 107). The net result is that there
are many risk factors for overtraining (110, 139) that must be
recogniz ed to avoid this problem. As evidenced by some who believe
there is no evidence of fatigue accumulation from resistance exercise
(63), much more resear ch is needed (48, 135). It is highly likely that
understanding this complexi ty will require novel and emerging
resear ch methods and approaches such as advanced  statistical
1695
model ing and work in the field of -omics  (e.g., proteom ics and
genomics) (4 , 30).
1696
Factors Contributing to Overreaching
and Overtraining
The first step in understanding overtraining and overreaching is
identi fying the balance between stress  and recovery  (53). Stress
from a strength and condi tioning program must be counter ed with
adequate recovery to permi t long-term progression (figure 24.8).
The inability to adequately recover will undoubtedly result in an
overtraining scenario . Likewise, an inadequate training load will likely
produce suboptimal performance. The challenge for the strength and
condi tioning professional is to find the appropriate balance to
maximiz e the long-term perf ormance adaptations.
FIGURE 24.8 Although many factors can contribute to poor performance, overtraining,
as the name impl ies, is due to ex cessiv e training, inadequate r ecovery, or both.
Training Factors
Since we are focusing on overtraining and overreaching in the
strength and condi tioning context, the first and most obvious
contributing factors are found in the strength and condi tioning
program in question. A quick review of the numer ous variables in the
resistance exercise program illustrates the many ways the program
can be adjuste d to the needs of the individual being trained (139;
see chapter 18). In gener al, the volume of training (e.g., total
repetitions, volume-load, mechanical work, metabo lic work,
frequency of training) and the intensi ty of training (e.g., relative
intensi ty [%RM], absolute intensi ty [kg], perceptions of effort) are
1697
important variables when determining the training stress (figure
24.9). Excessive amounts of either training volume or intensi ty can
combine to produce an overtraining stimulus. Monitoring the
characteristics of the training program may be one of the most
important methods for prescribing load. Additional ly, the long-term
periodiz ed training program also must be correctly applied. Even
though a periodiz ed program can be effective (see chapter 22), it
can also be incorr ectly designed, resulting in overtraining.
Additional ly, an appropriately designed training taper can also
enhance performance testing (96). Another training error is a lack of
variation in the training load (126), which can be quanti fied by
calculating the coefficient of variation  (%CV; SD/ x–) for the
training load (29, 82, 139). Finally, the most important part of an
athlete’ s training stress is the sport-speci fic training and practices,
not to mention the str esses of competi tion.
FIGURE 24.9 Excessiv e levels of training volume and intensi ty can contribute to
overtraining.
Allostatic Load
Often overlooked aspects of an overtraining syndr ome are
contributing factors outside the training hall or the competi tion
arena. These are many and varied, and in the context of overtraining
they have been termed the allostatic load (86, 107). Collectively,
the cumulativ e causes of stress (i.e., antecedents ) produce the
various stress responses (i.e., allostatic load) (71, 86). The allostatic
load is created by various antecedents (i.e., contributing factors) that
1698
produce adverse responses of the body that are part of the stress
responses. To better understand the stress, various algori thms have
been created to help make sense of all the antece dents that
contribute to this problem (21). In this stress model, if the allostatic
load is too great, illness or disease can result. A simple description of
the allostatic load is the wear and tear on the body (103). The
concept of allostatic load was original ly presented in 1993 (86) and
is a central concept for the study of how humans respond and adapt
to stresses (71). If we now apply the concept of allostat ic loads to
overtraining syndrome, we see that the totality of stresses to the
body include primary factors that are part of the training and
recovery process and secondary factors that also contribute to the
overtraining syndr ome but are not part of training and competi tion.
Collectively, the allostatic load can create a large stress that must be
consider ed by the strength  and condi tioning professional when
planning tr aining pr ograms to a void overtraining.
Figure 24.10 illustrates how these secondary factors can
contribute to an overtraining  syndr ome. One important note is that
these secondary factors that can contribute to the overtraining
syndr ome can also be caused by an overtraining syndr ome. The
challenge is to determine if these factors exist outside the training
program and add to the overtraining stress or if they are created by
overtraining. Many factors have been identi fied as possibly
contributing to overtraining syndr ome (107, 110) and are shown in
figure 24.10 (1, 8, 26, 29, 31, 34, 36, 37, 39, 40, 41, 45, 52, 54-57 ,
60, 62, 76, 80, 81, 88, 98, 102, 111, 118-120).
1699
FIGURE 24.10  Allostatic load includes all contributing factors to overtraining and
overtraining syndr ome (OTS). Solid lines notate required factors or direct causes. Dashed
lines show contributing f actors, not dir ect causes.
1700
Underperformance and Its Relation to
Overtraining and Overreaching
Despi te the name of this chapter , all discussions regarding
overtraining and overreaching must start with the concept of
underperformance . Although all our efforts may go to creating
training programs to optimiz e performance, achieving excellence can
be very elusiv e. Seldom are all components of the training and
competi tion processes in complete synchr ony. The job of a strength
and condi tionin g professional is to help navigate the athlete through
the many hurdles standing in the way of achieving absolute peak
performance. Although few, if any, may ever attain that level of
performance perfection, the task of the strength and condi tioning
professional is to develop, prescribe, and apply the type of training
program that gives the athlete the best opportuni ty to reach that
goal. Therefore, it is not only necessary to know how to develop the
appropriately challenging training program required to reach this
level of performance but also to understand what is happe ning when
performance is less than expected (i.e., underperf ormance). We will
see that even though overtraining and overreaching can be
contributors to underperf ormance, many other factors can contribute
as well. Many may be beyond our control, but recognizing possible
contributing factors will permi t the strength and condi tioning
professional to determine what appropriate measur es can be taken
to help the athlete when, despite all the effort, he or she comes up
short. In summary , not all cases of underperf ormance are due to
overtraining or overreaching (figure 24.11). When looking closely at
factors that can adversely influence performance, figure 24.12 lists a
number of factors that can interfere with optimum performance. As
with the stressors that contribute to allostatic load for OTS, many
nontraining v ariables can contribute to underperf ormance.
1701
FIGURE 24.11 The results of overtraining are one type of underperf ormance, but not all
types of underperf ormance ar e due to o vertraining.
FIGURE 24.12 Underperf ormance is not necessari ly the same thing as overtraining. Solid
lines depict dir ect causes. Dashed l ines show contributing f actors, not dir ect causes.
Not all cases of underperformance are due to
overtraining or overreaching.
One common training error that can be mistak en for overtraining
is due to the timing of the training program with the competi tion
1702
schedule. Figure 24.13 shows how even a training program that is
well designed to produce enhanced performance can be ineffective if
the training peak does not coincide with when the athlete needs to
perform (96). At first glance , overtraining may be blamed for the
underperf ormance, but the reality is that inappr opriate timing, not
excessiv e training, w as the cause.
1703
Performance-Related Variables Affected
by Overtraining and Overreaching
Up to this point we have discussed what contributes to overtraining
and overreaching, but at some point, the strength and condi tioning
professional needs to know how and when performance is affected
(figure 24.14). To better understand performance decrements due to
overtraining, a number of studies have been performed both in the
laboratory and in the field (32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 39, 41, 42, 76, 99,
100, 108, 133). One of the problems with this line of research is the
difficulty in creating an overtraining syndr ome in the laboratory, and
when data are taken from actual athletes who have overtrained, the
lack of study control makes interpr eting the data difficult.
Regardless, table 24.1 lists a number  of performance measur es that
have been shown to be adversely affected by overtraining or are
believed to be vulner able to overtraining (18, 33, 35, 36, 38, 39, 41,
42, 43, 50, 52, 78, 105, 106, 124, 139). The wide range of
performances that can be affected makes understa nding the
practical implications of overtraining challenging. In general, when
overtraining in the weight room, speed (e.g., sprinting) is most
sensitive to overtraining and decreases before most other variables.
This is closely followed by decreases in power (force × velocity),
with maximal strength consistently being one of the last
performances to decrease. It is essential that the strength and
condi tioning professionals monitor training performances to
determine if any of these performances are changing and to include
relevant variables in an athlete moni toring pr ogram.
1704
FIGURE 24.13  Training and performance timing. Not all impair ed performances are due
to overtraining.
Adapted by permission from V.M. Zatsiorsky, W.J. Kraemer, and A.C. Fry, Science and Practice of Strength Training, 3rd
ed. (Human Kinetics, 2021), 180.
FIGURE 24.14  Influence of overtraining and overtraining syndr ome on performance-
related v ariables.
1705
Physiological Mechanisms Associated
With Overreaching and Overtraining
As discussed earlier, not all forms of overtraining and the resulting
overtraining syndr ome are identical. Furthermor e, the symptoms and
physiological responses can also be quite different depending on the
individual and the characteristics of the training program. Howev er, a
number of physiological systems have either been shown or
theoriz ed to be affected by overtraining. It should be noted that
although these mechanisms can be the result of an overtraining
stimulus, it is also possible that if these condi tions are preexisting,
they can also contribute to an overtraining syndr ome and be
consider ed part of the allostatic load. Understanding the underlying
physiology can, in some cases, provide insight on preventive
strategies to help minimiz e the risk of developing overtraining
syndr ome and the accompan ying impairments in performance. Table
24.2 provides example references for each of the proposed
mechanisms, as wel l as the str ength of the data supporting each.
1706
Assessment of Overreaching and
Overtraining
Ideally, a carefully designed athlete monitoring program is developed
to determine the training and recovery capabi lities of each individual.
Qualities of the tests included  in this program must be specific to the
training being performed or the physiological system involved (i.e.,
valid), reliable (i.e., capable of providing consistent results), sensitive
to the training  and competi tion stimulus, and easy to incorpor ate
into the regular athlete monitoring program. Furthermor e, those
administering the tests must precisely follow correct protocols and
must ensure that each person performing the tests provides a
maximal effort. If the tests are not administer ed correctly, the data
acquir ed will be meaningles s. Once the tests are performed, an
efficient data management system must be used to help best
interpr et the results rapidly and correctly. Rapid turnar ound of test
results is important to permi t adjustments in the training program
when needed.
TABLE 24.1  Performance-Related Variables Affected
by Overtraining and Overreaching
Performance variable Sensitivity Onset
STRENGTH
1RM (dynamic constant external r esistance) Low Last to oc cur
Isometric f orce Poor Unknown
Isokinetic f orce High Within 1 week
Eccentric str ength Unknown Unknown
Stimulated f orce High Within 1 week
Single joint Poor If isokinetic, 1 week; i f
DCER, unknown
Multijoint Moder ate Last to oc cur
1707
Performance variable Sensitivity Onset
RATE OF FORCE DEVELOPMENT
Single joint Low Unknown
Multijoint Unknown Unknown
POWER
Resistance ex ercise High Within 1+ weeks
Vertical jump height Low Seldom oc curs
Vertical jump kinetics (v arious f orces and
reactiv e strength)High Within 1 week
Vertical jump kinematics (posi tions, str ategies) High Within 1 week
VELOCITY
Sprinting High Within 1+ weeks
Resistance ex ercise (DCER) High Within 1+ weeks
Change of dir ection and agi lity Moder ate Within 1+ weeks
Efficiency of electrical activi ty (EMG-to-f orce
ratio)High Within da ys
OTHER VARIABLES
Self-efficacy (confidence) High Within 1 week
Perceptions of r ecovery Very high Within da ys
Desire to tr ain High Within 1 week
Training capaci ty (toler ation of high v olumes
and frequent sessions)Moder ate Slower to oc cur
Performance Testing
Figure 24.15 is a compilation of suggested performance tests for the
early detection  of an impend ing overtraining syndr ome. Remember ,
impair ed performance is one of the requirements for diagnosing
overtraining. While not all inclusiv e, these tests have either been
found to be sensitive to the increased training loads that accompan y
1708
overtraining, or it has been theoriz ed that they can provide helpful
information (2, 9, 10, 19, 32, 33, 35, 38, 42, 65, 90, 97, 105, 106,
108, 123, 125, 129, 133, 139).
Physiological Testing
Although the strength and condi tioning professional does not
typical ly order medical or laboratory tests to monitor the health of
his or her athletes and the risk of overtraining, it is helpful to know
what types of tests are available and what information they provide.
Numer ous types of medical and physiological tests have been used
to help combat the onset of overtraining syndr ome. In gener al, the
meaningf ulness of these tests has been equiv ocal, dependent on the
subjects being studied, the training program being performed, and
the sport being monitored. A detailed description of all the tests
possible is beyond the scope of this chapter , but the reader is
welcome to examine some of the following references to get an idea
of what is available (9, 10, 19, 34, 36, 37, 39, 40, 45, 50, 54-57 , 59,
65, 72, 78-81, 84, 88, 89, 98, 104, 113, 123, 124, 126, 131, 138). In
gener al, numer ous potential ly helpful variables can be assessed from
the blood (e.g., hormone s and neurohormones, interleukins,
cytokines, markers of muscle disruption or damage , immune
factors), cardiovascular measur es (e.g., resting heart rate, heart rate
variabi lity, oxygen uptak e, muscle oxygen saturation), skeletal
muscle measur es (e.g., heat shock proteins, cell-signal ing pathways,
receptors), neuromuscular measur es (e.g., motor unit recruitment or
EMG activity), and orthopedic factors (e.g., joint inflammation or
inhibi tory input). Data of this type can help the resear cher and the
practitioner better understand the effects of overtraining and
perhaps eventually provide reliable biomark ers of a developing
overtraining syndr ome.
TABLE 24.2  Potential Physiological Mechanisms
Contributing to Overtraining Syndrome
Mechanism Reference(s) Evidence
1709
Mechanism Reference(s) Evidence
Sex-related f actors Kelly 2023 (68) Inconclusiv e
Circadian rh ythm disruption Nobari et al. 2023
(102)Likely
Cytokine disruption Smith 2000 (118)
la Torre et al. 2023
(76)Likely
Glutamine deficiency la Torre et al. 2023
(76)Possible
Decreased immune f unction Smith 2003 (119)
Baker et al. 2022
(8)Likely
Tissue tr auma Smith 2004 (120) Possible
Centr al fatigue theory Newsholme et al.
1991 (98)
Budget t et al. 2008
(15)Possible
Glycogen deficiency la Torre et al. 2023
(76)Strong
Autonomic nerv ous system disruption Israel 1976 (61) Strong
Sympathetic o vertraining syndr ome (SO TS) Fry et al. 1994 (36)
Fry et al. 2006 (41)
Nicoll et al. 2019
(100)Strong for str ength
and power tr aining
Parasympathetic o vertraining syndr ome
(POTS)Lehmann et al.
1991 (78)
Lehmann et al.
1999 (80)Strong for aer obic
training
Oxidativ e stress Lewis et al. 2018
(81)  Possible
Dietary insuf ficiencies (e.g. , fats, pr otein,
carboh ydrate, micr onutrients)la Torre et al. 2023
(76)Likely
Motor uni t recruitment Fry 1992 (31) Likely
1710
Mechanism Reference(s) Evidence
Endocrine disruption (e.g. , testoster one,
cortisol, tes/cort, gr owth hormone, hormone
receptors)Adlercreutz et al.
1986 (1)
Fry & Kr aemer
1997 (37)
Fry et al. 2005 (40)
Nicoll et al. 2016
(99)Strong
Orthopedic inhibi tion Fry et al. 2001 (39) Likely
Muscle cel lular signal ing Nicoll et al. 2016
(99)
Nicoll et al. 2019
(100)Strong
Neural modi fications Baker et al. 2022
(8)Possible
Impair ed cogni tive function Symons et al. 2023
(128)Likely
Figure 24.15  Example performance and training
assessments for an athlete monitoring program to
minimize risk of developing overtraining syndrome.
Monitored training loads (internal and external)
Resting heart r ate
Recovery heart r ate
Muscle O 2 saturation
Heart r ate variabi lity
Anaer obic thr esholds
V̇O2max
RPE/lactate
Muscle O 2 saturation
Ability to r epeat a GXT
Ability to complete a tr aining session
Vertical jump perf ormance
Height
Kinetics (f orces, power)
Kinematics (posi tions, str ategies)
1711
Stiffness
Eccentric use r atio
Resistance ex ercise perf ormance
Maximal str ength
Velocity-load pr ofile
Power-load pr ofile
Bar velocity at same absolute load
Isometric mid-thigh pul ls
Muscle endur ance tests
Rate of f orce production
Sprint perf ormance
Acceleration
First-step speed
Deceler ation
Max v elocity
Change of dir ection and agi lity perf ormance
Reaction and mo vement time
Cogni tive processing tests
Diet r ecords
Sleep r ecords
Training questionnair es
Competi tion data
Coaches’ subjectiv e assessment
Psychological Measures
Up to this point, we have discussed exclusiv ely quanti tative
measur ements of performance, training, or physiology . Howev er, it
has been suggested that questionnair es using subjectiv e measur es
may be more useful for monitoring athletes and their risk of
overtraining (115). To that end, numer ous survey instruments have
been developed to help monitor athlete perceptions of training
status and recovery. Table 24.3 lists a numbe r of these tools that
strength and condi tioning professionals may find helpful to use.
Several consider ations when selecting a questionnair e for athlete
monitoring include the f ollowing:
1712
How long is the questionnair e, and how many items need to
be completed?
Has the questionnair e been v alidated?
Is the wor ding easy to understand f or the intended audience?
Is it easy to pr ocess the data f or a r apid turnar ound?
Can the questionnair e be answer ed wi thout an y coer cion?
Is the questionnair e sensi tive to an o vertraining stimulus?
All of these issues are essential to obtain helpful information. In
addition to overtraining-r elated surveys, several instru ments are
available to determine the coaching motiv ational climate (44). It has
been clearly shown that the motiv ational orientation of the athlete as
well as the climate created by the coach has a large positive effect
on athlete effort, enjoyment, and retention in the sport. These
assessments do not need to be administer ed as often as training-
related questionnair es but can be a critical part of the athlete
monitoring program that is often overlook ed. Needless to say, the
coaching climate is highly dependent on coaching strategies.
Another related aspect is the mental health and well-being of the
coach, which can directly affect athletes’ performance satisfaction
(7). Finally, it must be realized that the psychological well-being of
the athlete may be enhance d by reinforcing mindf ulness traits (12,
20), creating both a caring climate and a task-oriented climate (44),
and being aware of mood states (95). It stands to reason that
mental ly healthy athletes may be able to withstand the rigors of
stressful training bet ter (64).
TABLE 24.3  Questionnaires for Monitoring
Overtraining and Overreaching and the Perceptions
of the Psychological Climate
Questionnaire References
OVERTRAINING RELATED
Rating of per ceived ex ertion (RPE)   Borg 1982 (11)
1713
Questionnaire References
CR10 RPE Borg 1982 (11)
Profile of Mood States (POMS) McNair et al. 1971 (87)
Morgan et al. 1987 (95)
37-item POMS Coyne et al. 2018 (24)
Daily Analysis of Li fe Demands f or Athletes (DALDA) Rushall et al. 1990 (112)
Emotional R ecovery Questionnair e (EmR ecQ) Lundqvist and K enttä 2010
(83)
Multi-Component T raining Distr ess Scale (MTDS) Main and Gr ove 2009 (84)
Recovery-Stress Questionnair e for Coaches (REST -Q in
Sport)Kellman 2002 (67)
Acute R ecovery & Str ess Scale (ARS S) Kellman and Köl ling 2019
(67)
Short R ecovery & Str ess Scale (SRS S) Kellman and Köl ling 2019
(67)
Recovery-Cue I nventory Questionnair e Kellman et al. 2002 (66)
Total Qual ity Recovery Questionnair e (TQR) Kenttä and Hassmén 2002
(70)
Perceived Recovery Status Laurent et al. 2011 (77)
Rating of F atigue S cale Micklewright et al. 2017 (91)
Resistance Ex ercise Ov ertraining Questionnair e Fry et al. (35, 41, 42, 43)
Hooper I ndex Hooper et al. 1995 (59)
Training Distr ess Scale ( TDS) Grove et al. 2014 (51)
Performance F ailure Appr aisal I nventory (PF AI) Conroy et al. 2002 (23)
PSYCHOLOGICAL CLIMATE RELATED
Task-Ego Orientation in Sport Questionnair e (TEOSQ)   Fry and Moor e 2019 (44)
Perceived Motiv ational Cl imate in Sport Questionnair e
(PMCSQ)Fry and Moor e 2019 (44)
Caring Cl imate S cale (CCS)   Fry and Moor e 2019 (44)
SLEEP RELATED
1714
Questionnaire References
Pittsburgh Sleeping Qual ity Index (PSQI) Buysse et al. 1989 (17)
Athlete Sleeping S creening Questionnair e (ASSQ) Samuels et al. 2015 (114)
COACH MENTAL HEALTH RELATED
Multiday coach surv ey Balk et al. 2019 (7)
1715
Recovery Methods and Strategies
Once overtraining or overreaching has occurred and the individual
has developed an overtraining syndr ome, the most important next
step is developing a recovery plan. An important consider ation is
that overtraining often has a complex and sometimes slow onset and
is not rapidly reversed. Table 24.4 lists some of the essential or
suggested measur es that must be tak en when o vertraining oc curs.
Training Factors for Recovery
Once overtraining occurs and overtraining syndr ome has developed,
the first thing that must be done is a careful revision of the training
program. A rapid decrease in the training volume, intensi ty, or both
is typical ly warranted. When overreaching has occurred, training
cessation has permi tted performance to return to original levels in as
little as one week (36, 37, 87, 88, 111, 139). When more serious
levels of overtraining have occurred, recovery can take as long as
four weeks after high-intensi ty resistance exercise (35) or months to
a year after high-volume distance running (78). In each case,
training volume or intensi ty was immediately decreased or removed.
It may not always be practical or desirable to cease training,
depending on each individua l case. Although it has been suggested
that one week of resistanc e training cessation does not benefi t
strength and hypertr ophy gains, the training did not incorpor ate
training similar to overtraining or overreaching (22). Regardless,
decreasing or eliminating the training stress is mandatory when
overtraining has oc curred.
TABLE 24.4  Possible Strategies for Recovering From
Overtraining, Overreaching, and the Overtraining
Syndrome
Strategy or method Reference(s) Effectiveness
TRAINING FACTORS
1716
Strategy or method Reference(s) Effectiveness
Modify training pr ogram (e.g. , decr ease
volume, f requency , intensi ty, training
cessation)Fry et al. 1994 (33)
Fry et al. 2006 (41)
Nicoll et al. 2019
(100)Most str ong
Training taper (r elated to abo ve items) Mujika and P adilla
2003 (96)Strong
RECOVERY MODALITIES
Mindf ulness-based interv entions Cao et al. 2022 (20)
Mihajlo vic et al. 2023
(92)Promising
Bed rest Spiering et al. 2023
(121)Good f or injuries,
poor f or fitness
Vibration f oam r olling Alonso-Calv ete et al.
2022 (3)Possible
Massage Li et al. 2024 (82) Inconclusiv e
Myofascial r elease Martínez -Aranda et
al. 2024 (85)Possible
Quality sleep Cunha et al. 2023
(26)Strong
Compr ession garments Li et al. 2024 (82) Possible
Hydration Mihajlo vic et al. 2023
(92)Possible
Acupunctur e Mihajlo vic et al. 2023
(92)Possible
Red-light ther apy Mihajlo vic et al. 2023
(92)Possible
DIET AND SUPPLEMENTATION
Branched chain amino acids Salem et al. 2024
(113)Possible
Protein Res et al. 2012 (109) Possible
Carboh ydrates Li et al. 2024 (82) Promising
1717
Strategy or method Reference(s) Effectiveness
Nitrates Gamonales et al.
2022 (47)Possible
L-glutamine Mihajlo vic et al. 2023
(92)Possible
Vitamins Mihajlo vic et al. 2023
(92)Possible
Oral ATP Wilson et al. 2013
(136)Possible
CRYOTHERAPY
Cold-water immersion Moore et al. 2022
(94)
Xiao et al. 2023
(138)Promising
Other cry otherapy-related methods Li et al. 2024 (82) Inconclusiv e
Recovery Modalities
Many recovery modal ities have been successfully used by therapists
for medical ly related condi tions. It stands to reason that these
methods may also be effective countermeasur es for those recovering
from overtraining, but there are few data supporting these methods
for this purpose. Nevertheles s, table 24.4 lists a number  of methods
that show pr omise f or helping the r ecovery pr ocess.
Integrating Recovery Methods Into the
Training Process
Before overtraining occurs, the strength and condi tioning
professional must be aware of risk factors that can be controlled.
The top part of figure 24.16 lists some of these factors, many of
which can be readily controlled. The middle part of figure 24.16 lists
several items that may be helpful when interpr eting physiological
data. For more detail on the specifics of these overtraining
consider ations, the reader is referred to the references listed in table
1718
24.4 (page 792) and the reviews and chapters cited earlier in this
chapter . Finally, the bottom part of figure 24.16 provides action
items that can be implement ed easily to help the practitioner avoid
the onset of overtraining and overtraining syndr ome. Before
implementing an athlete monitoring program or a system to
diagnose an overtraining syndrome, Bernacik ová and colleagues (9)
suggest classifying any intended tests using three categories of
assessments:
Category I. Daily tests, easy to administer , inexpensiv e, rapid
turnar ound of r esults, con venient f or the coach and athlete
Category II. Every few days, more complex, longer
questionnair es, slightly more inconvenient to the athlete than
category I, r apid turnar ound of r esults
Category III. Occasional ly administer ed (e.g., once a month),
more involved and intrusive, more expensiv e, longer
turnar ound time f or the r esults
Figure 24.16  Overtraining risk factors,
considerations, and strategies to minimize risk of
developing an overtraining syndrome.
Overtraining Risk Factors
Lack of close monitoring of the training program (rest days, prior exposur e
to stressful training)
Training and activi ties outside the weight r oom, which can be a pr oblem
Use of virtual coaching wi th no f ace-to-f ace contact
Lack of an y objectiv e moni toring
Training higher lev el and mor e fit athletes
Unmoni tored recovery tr aining sessions
Training during Olympic or world championship training blocks (i.e., final
training phase f or an ul timate competi tion)
Failure to implement an appr opriate tr aining taper
Coaching perf ormed b y someone wi th little coaching experience or tr aining
Change of tr aining en vironment (e.g. , heat or cold, humidi ty, altitude)
1719
Overtraining Considerations
Not al l types of o vertraining ar e identical.
Strength is wel l-protected.
Speed and power ma y be mor e sensi tive to o vertraining.
Psychological v ariables ma y be ef fective mark ers.
Hormonal v ariables indicate str ess, not O T.
Orthopedic pr oblems pr esent di fferent O TS.
Autonomic nerv ous system activi ty responds r apidly to O T.
Muscle fiber maladaptation can f ollow.
Overtraining Avoidance Strategies
Use activ e and passiv e recovery methods during tr aining.
Allow one or mor e days of r outine tr aining abstinence to enhance r ecovery.
Rest da ys are critical.
Limit excessiv ely long tr aining sessions and too man y sessions in a da y.
Exercise caution with excessiv e training volumes and large increases in
training v olume (>30% incr eases).
Prior exposur e to str essful training enhances tr aining str ess toler ance.
Variation in the training stimulus is critical, and use of periodiz ed training is
important.
Avoid ex cessiv e training to f ailure.
Coordinate resistan ce exercise with other stressors (e.g., sport training and
other condi tioning).
Incorpor ate recovery str ategies (e.g. , sleep , diet, mental ski lls).
Appropriate diet for training (e.g., adequate Kcal, protein ingestion, glycogen
repletion, suf ficient vi tamins and miner als, adequate fluid intak e).
Dietary supplements may help (e.g., recovery drinks, protein and
carboh ydrate supplements, cr eatine, or al ATP).
Monitor outside str essors.
Monitor internal and external tr aining loads.
Incorpor ate an athlete moni toring pr ogram.
It is suggested that category  I testing be performed first. If the
results suggest possible overtraining concerns, testing for category
II is warranted. Likewise, if the category II test suggests an
1720
overtraining problem, a category III test may be performed. In this
manner , unnecessary testing can be a voided.
1721
Conclusion
The occurrence of overtraining or nonfunctional overreaching can be
devastating to those athletes training for high performance. Not only
does it mean they are not able to perform as planned, but it can also
mean that training and performance are impair ed for an extended
period of time. While those who are seriously training may want to
push themselv es as much as possible, they must be careful not to
pass the threshold so that overtraining occurs. Due to the complex
nature of this problem, it can result in the maladaptation of many
physiological systems (figure 24.17). Conversely , preexisting
problems in any of these physiological systems can also contribute to
an overtraining  syndr ome. Overall, we have discussed in this chapter
how everything revolves around the impair ed performances caused
by improper training (figure 24.18). Howev er, it is clear that many
factors can contribute to this problem. Knowledge of the causes and
effects of overtraining and how to avoid it and recover from it are
valuable tools for every successful strength and conditioning
professional.
1722
FIGURE 24.17  Overtraining syndrome can affect numer ous physiological systems that in
turn can contribute to impair ed perf ormance.
Adapted by permission from A.C. Fry, “The Role of Training Intensity in Resistance Exercise Overtraining and
Overreaching,” in Overtraining in Sports, edited by R.B. Kreider, A.C. Fry, and M.L. O’Toole (Human Kinetics, 1998),
107-130.
1723
FIGURE 24.18  Summary of factors contributing to overtraining syndr ome and different
levels of performance impairment. Additional ly, many factors other than overtraining can
result in underperf ormance.
KEY TERMS
Addisonoid syndr ome
adrenal exhaustion
adrenaline
allostatic load
antecedents
autonomic nerv ous system
catecholamines
coefficient of v ariation
down-r egulation
epinephrine
functional o verreaching (FOR)
gener al adaptation syndr ome (GA S)
1724
nonfunctional o verreaching (NFOR)
overreaching (OR)
overtraining
overtraining syndr ome (O TS)
parasympathetic o vertraining syndr ome (PO TS)
performance stagnation
recovery
relative ener gy deficiency syndr ome (RED- S)
stress
sympathetic o vertraining syndr ome (SO TS)
underperf ormance
STUDY QUESTIONS
  1.  Which of the following is required for an overtraining
syndr ome to exist?
  a.  impair ed perf ormances r equiring long-term r ecovery
  b.  decr eased testoster one and incr eased cortisol
concentr ations
  c.  lack of suc cess in athletic competi tions
  d.  ac cumulation of nontr aining or sport str esses
  2.  What types of physical performances are first affected by
overtraining or o verreaching?
  a.  high- velocity activi ties
  b.  maximum str ength tasks
  c.  oxygen uptak e capabi lities
  d.  repeated interv al tasks
  3.  If factors outside of the training program or sport contests are
contributing to overtraining syndr ome, what is this collection
of factors cal led?
  a.  al lostatic load
  b.  psychosocial dysf unction
  c.  pr ogram volume-load
  d.  autonomic nerv ous system dysf unction
1725
  4.  When correctly implemented, which of the following can be an
effective training tool?
  a.  functional o verreaching
  b.  nonf unctional o verreaching
  c.  al lostatic moni toring phase
  d.  kinetic modulation r atio adjustments
  5.  Moni toring for overtraining avoidance should include which of
the following?
  a.  relevant assessments that ar e easy to administer and ha ve
rapid turnar ound of r esults
  b.  detai led cel lular and molecular ev aluations to determine
the causes of impair ed perf ormances
  c.  blood sampl ing for hormone testing of o vertraining-r elated
biomark ers
  d.  determination of k ey training thr esholds that al l individuals
should a void
1726