# Section 24.4

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 24: Overreaching, Overtraining, and Recovery

**Section:** 24.4 -- Overtraining Syndrome

**PDF Pages:** 1711--1720

Mechanism Reference(s) Evidence
Endocrine disruption (e.g. , testoster one,
cortisol, tes/cort, gr owth hormone, hormone
receptors)Adlercreutz et al.
1986 (1)
Fry & Kr aemer
1997 (37)
Fry et al. 2005 (40)
Nicoll et al. 2016
(99)Strong
Orthopedic inhibi tion Fry et al. 2001 (39) Likely
Muscle cel lular signal ing Nicoll et al. 2016
(99)
Nicoll et al. 2019
(100)Strong
Neural modi fications Baker et al. 2022
(8)Possible
Impair ed cogni tive function Symons et al. 2023
(128)Likely
Figure 24.15  Example performance and training
assessments for an athlete monitoring program to
minimize risk of developing overtraining syndrome.
Monitored training loads (internal and external)
Resting heart r ate
Recovery heart r ate
Muscle O 2 saturation
Heart r ate variabi lity
Anaer obic thr esholds
V̇O2max
RPE/lactate
Muscle O 2 saturation
Ability to r epeat a GXT
Ability to complete a tr aining session
Vertical jump perf ormance
Height
Kinetics (f orces, power)
Kinematics (posi tions, str ategies)
1711
Stiffness
Eccentric use r atio
Resistance ex ercise perf ormance
Maximal str ength
Velocity-load pr ofile
Power-load pr ofile
Bar velocity at same absolute load
Isometric mid-thigh pul ls
Muscle endur ance tests
Rate of f orce production
Sprint perf ormance
Acceleration
First-step speed
Deceler ation
Max v elocity
Change of dir ection and agi lity perf ormance
Reaction and mo vement time
Cogni tive processing tests
Diet r ecords
Sleep r ecords
Training questionnair es
Competi tion data
Coaches’ subjectiv e assessment
Psychological Measures
Up to this point, we have discussed exclusiv ely quanti tative
measur ements of performance, training, or physiology . Howev er, it
has been suggested that questionnair es using subjectiv e measur es
may be more useful for monitoring athletes and their risk of
overtraining (115). To that end, numer ous survey instruments have
been developed to help monitor athlete perceptions of training
status and recovery. Table 24.3 lists a numbe r of these tools that
strength and condi tioning professionals may find helpful to use.
Several consider ations when selecting a questionnair e for athlete
monitoring include the f ollowing:
1712
How long is the questionnair e, and how many items need to
be completed?
Has the questionnair e been v alidated?
Is the wor ding easy to understand f or the intended audience?
Is it easy to pr ocess the data f or a r apid turnar ound?
Can the questionnair e be answer ed wi thout an y coer cion?
Is the questionnair e sensi tive to an o vertraining stimulus?
All of these issues are essential to obtain helpful information. In
addition to overtraining-r elated surveys, several instru ments are
available to determine the coaching motiv ational climate (44). It has
been clearly shown that the motiv ational orientation of the athlete as
well as the climate created by the coach has a large positive effect
on athlete effort, enjoyment, and retention in the sport. These
assessments do not need to be administer ed as often as training-
related questionnair es but can be a critical part of the athlete
monitoring program that is often overlook ed. Needless to say, the
coaching climate is highly dependent on coaching strategies.
Another related aspect is the mental health and well-being of the
coach, which can directly affect athletes’ performance satisfaction
(7). Finally, it must be realized that the psychological well-being of
the athlete may be enhance d by reinforcing mindf ulness traits (12,
20), creating both a caring climate and a task-oriented climate (44),
and being aware of mood states (95). It stands to reason that
mental ly healthy athletes may be able to withstand the rigors of
stressful training bet ter (64).
TABLE 24.3  Questionnaires for Monitoring
Overtraining and Overreaching and the Perceptions
of the Psychological Climate
Questionnaire References
OVERTRAINING RELATED
Rating of per ceived ex ertion (RPE)   Borg 1982 (11)
1713
Questionnaire References
CR10 RPE Borg 1982 (11)
Profile of Mood States (POMS) McNair et al. 1971 (87)
Morgan et al. 1987 (95)
37-item POMS Coyne et al. 2018 (24)
Daily Analysis of Li fe Demands f or Athletes (DALDA) Rushall et al. 1990 (112)
Emotional R ecovery Questionnair e (EmR ecQ) Lundqvist and K enttä 2010
(83)
Multi-Component T raining Distr ess Scale (MTDS) Main and Gr ove 2009 (84)
Recovery-Stress Questionnair e for Coaches (REST -Q in
Sport)Kellman 2002 (67)
Acute R ecovery & Str ess Scale (ARS S) Kellman and Köl ling 2019
(67)
Short R ecovery & Str ess Scale (SRS S) Kellman and Köl ling 2019
(67)
Recovery-Cue I nventory Questionnair e Kellman et al. 2002 (66)
Total Qual ity Recovery Questionnair e (TQR) Kenttä and Hassmén 2002
(70)
Perceived Recovery Status Laurent et al. 2011 (77)
Rating of F atigue S cale Micklewright et al. 2017 (91)
Resistance Ex ercise Ov ertraining Questionnair e Fry et al. (35, 41, 42, 43)
Hooper I ndex Hooper et al. 1995 (59)
Training Distr ess Scale ( TDS) Grove et al. 2014 (51)
Performance F ailure Appr aisal I nventory (PF AI) Conroy et al. 2002 (23)
PSYCHOLOGICAL CLIMATE RELATED
Task-Ego Orientation in Sport Questionnair e (TEOSQ)   Fry and Moor e 2019 (44)
Perceived Motiv ational Cl imate in Sport Questionnair e
(PMCSQ)Fry and Moor e 2019 (44)
Caring Cl imate S cale (CCS)   Fry and Moor e 2019 (44)
SLEEP RELATED
1714
Questionnaire References
Pittsburgh Sleeping Qual ity Index (PSQI) Buysse et al. 1989 (17)
Athlete Sleeping S creening Questionnair e (ASSQ) Samuels et al. 2015 (114)
COACH MENTAL HEALTH RELATED
Multiday coach surv ey Balk et al. 2019 (7)
1715
Recovery Methods and Strategies
Once overtraining or overreaching has occurred and the individual
has developed an overtraining syndr ome, the most important next
step is developing a recovery plan. An important consider ation is
that overtraining often has a complex and sometimes slow onset and
is not rapidly reversed. Table 24.4 lists some of the essential or
suggested measur es that must be tak en when o vertraining oc curs.
Training Factors for Recovery
Once overtraining occurs and overtraining syndr ome has developed,
the first thing that must be done is a careful revision of the training
program. A rapid decrease in the training volume, intensi ty, or both
is typical ly warranted. When overreaching has occurred, training
cessation has permi tted performance to return to original levels in as
little as one week (36, 37, 87, 88, 111, 139). When more serious
levels of overtraining have occurred, recovery can take as long as
four weeks after high-intensi ty resistance exercise (35) or months to
a year after high-volume distance running (78). In each case,
training volume or intensi ty was immediately decreased or removed.
It may not always be practical or desirable to cease training,
depending on each individua l case. Although it has been suggested
that one week of resistanc e training cessation does not benefi t
strength and hypertr ophy gains, the training did not incorpor ate
training similar to overtraining or overreaching (22). Regardless,
decreasing or eliminating the training stress is mandatory when
overtraining has oc curred.
TABLE 24.4  Possible Strategies for Recovering From
Overtraining, Overreaching, and the Overtraining
Syndrome
Strategy or method Reference(s) Effectiveness
TRAINING FACTORS
1716
Strategy or method Reference(s) Effectiveness
Modify training pr ogram (e.g. , decr ease
volume, f requency , intensi ty, training
cessation)Fry et al. 1994 (33)
Fry et al. 2006 (41)
Nicoll et al. 2019
(100)Most str ong
Training taper (r elated to abo ve items) Mujika and P adilla
2003 (96)Strong
RECOVERY MODALITIES
Mindf ulness-based interv entions Cao et al. 2022 (20)
Mihajlo vic et al. 2023
(92)Promising
Bed rest Spiering et al. 2023
(121)Good f or injuries,
poor f or fitness
Vibration f oam r olling Alonso-Calv ete et al.
2022 (3)Possible
Massage Li et al. 2024 (82) Inconclusiv e
Myofascial r elease Martínez -Aranda et
al. 2024 (85)Possible
Quality sleep Cunha et al. 2023
(26)Strong
Compr ession garments Li et al. 2024 (82) Possible
Hydration Mihajlo vic et al. 2023
(92)Possible
Acupunctur e Mihajlo vic et al. 2023
(92)Possible
Red-light ther apy Mihajlo vic et al. 2023
(92)Possible
DIET AND SUPPLEMENTATION
Branched chain amino acids Salem et al. 2024
(113)Possible
Protein Res et al. 2012 (109) Possible
Carboh ydrates Li et al. 2024 (82) Promising
1717
Strategy or method Reference(s) Effectiveness
Nitrates Gamonales et al.
2022 (47)Possible
L-glutamine Mihajlo vic et al. 2023
(92)Possible
Vitamins Mihajlo vic et al. 2023
(92)Possible
Oral ATP Wilson et al. 2013
(136)Possible
CRYOTHERAPY
Cold-water immersion Moore et al. 2022
(94)
Xiao et al. 2023
(138)Promising
Other cry otherapy-related methods Li et al. 2024 (82) Inconclusiv e
Recovery Modalities
Many recovery modal ities have been successfully used by therapists
for medical ly related condi tions. It stands to reason that these
methods may also be effective countermeasur es for those recovering
from overtraining, but there are few data supporting these methods
for this purpose. Nevertheles s, table 24.4 lists a number  of methods
that show pr omise f or helping the r ecovery pr ocess.
Integrating Recovery Methods Into the
Training Process
Before overtraining occurs, the strength and condi tioning
professional must be aware of risk factors that can be controlled.
The top part of figure 24.16 lists some of these factors, many of
which can be readily controlled. The middle part of figure 24.16 lists
several items that may be helpful when interpr eting physiological
data. For more detail on the specifics of these overtraining
consider ations, the reader is referred to the references listed in table
1718
24.4 (page 792) and the reviews and chapters cited earlier in this
chapter . Finally, the bottom part of figure 24.16 provides action
items that can be implement ed easily to help the practitioner avoid
the onset of overtraining and overtraining syndr ome. Before
implementing an athlete monitoring program or a system to
diagnose an overtraining syndrome, Bernacik ová and colleagues (9)
suggest classifying any intended tests using three categories of
assessments:
Category I. Daily tests, easy to administer , inexpensiv e, rapid
turnar ound of r esults, con venient f or the coach and athlete
Category II. Every few days, more complex, longer
questionnair es, slightly more inconvenient to the athlete than
category I, r apid turnar ound of r esults
Category III. Occasional ly administer ed (e.g., once a month),
more involved and intrusive, more expensiv e, longer
turnar ound time f or the r esults
Figure 24.16  Overtraining risk factors,
considerations, and strategies to minimize risk of
developing an overtraining syndrome.
Overtraining Risk Factors
Lack of close monitoring of the training program (rest days, prior exposur e
to stressful training)
Training and activi ties outside the weight r oom, which can be a pr oblem
Use of virtual coaching wi th no f ace-to-f ace contact
Lack of an y objectiv e moni toring
Training higher lev el and mor e fit athletes
Unmoni tored recovery tr aining sessions
Training during Olympic or world championship training blocks (i.e., final
training phase f or an ul timate competi tion)
Failure to implement an appr opriate tr aining taper
Coaching perf ormed b y someone wi th little coaching experience or tr aining
Change of tr aining en vironment (e.g. , heat or cold, humidi ty, altitude)
1719
Overtraining Considerations
Not al l types of o vertraining ar e identical.
Strength is wel l-protected.
Speed and power ma y be mor e sensi tive to o vertraining.
Psychological v ariables ma y be ef fective mark ers.
Hormonal v ariables indicate str ess, not O T.
Orthopedic pr oblems pr esent di fferent O TS.
Autonomic nerv ous system activi ty responds r apidly to O T.
Muscle fiber maladaptation can f ollow.
Overtraining Avoidance Strategies
Use activ e and passiv e recovery methods during tr aining.
Allow one or mor e days of r outine tr aining abstinence to enhance r ecovery.
Rest da ys are critical.
Limit excessiv ely long tr aining sessions and too man y sessions in a da y.
Exercise caution with excessiv e training volumes and large increases in
training v olume (>30% incr eases).
Prior exposur e to str essful training enhances tr aining str ess toler ance.
Variation in the training stimulus is critical, and use of periodiz ed training is
important.
Avoid ex cessiv e training to f ailure.
Coordinate resistan ce exercise with other stressors (e.g., sport training and
other condi tioning).
Incorpor ate recovery str ategies (e.g. , sleep , diet, mental ski lls).
Appropriate diet for training (e.g., adequate Kcal, protein ingestion, glycogen
repletion, suf ficient vi tamins and miner als, adequate fluid intak e).
Dietary supplements may help (e.g., recovery drinks, protein and
carboh ydrate supplements, cr eatine, or al ATP).
Monitor outside str essors.
Monitor internal and external tr aining loads.
Incorpor ate an athlete moni toring pr ogram.
It is suggested that category  I testing be performed first. If the
results suggest possible overtraining concerns, testing for category
II is warranted. Likewise, if the category II test suggests an
1720