# Section 24.1

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 24: Overreaching, Overtraining, and Recovery

**Section:** 24.1 -- General Adaptation Syndrome

**PDF Pages:** 1679--1690

CHAPTER  24
OVERREACHING,
OVERTRAINING, AND
RECOVERY
Andrew C. Fry, PhD, and Bradley C. Nindl, PhD
After completing this chapter, you will be able to
define and di fferentiate o vertraining and o verreaching;
understand the di fference between the pr ocess of o vertraining
and the r esult of the o vertraining syndr ome;
recogniz e contributing f actors to o vertraining and o verreaching;
understand the r ole of al lostatic loading;
realize that not al l decr eases in perf ormance ar e due to
overtraining;
know the ph ysical perf ormances most sensi tive to o vertraining
and o verreaching;
appreciate the ph ysiological, biomechanical, and psy chological
responses and adaptations to o vertraining and o verreaching;
learn about potential str ategies f or avoiding perf ormance
decrements due to o vertraining; and
understand how f unctional o verreaching can be a beneficial
part of an appr opriately designed tr aining pr ogram.
1679
Training for optimum performance is familiar territory for athletes, as
it is for most people. Attaining one’s performance potential often
requires advanced training methods that include phases (i.e., cycles
or blocks) of high training volumes and intensi ties (see chapter 22).
While these training phases can be effective for long-term
performance enhancement, they also run the risk of creating a
training stimulu s that is greater than the recovery capabi lities of the
individual. When this happens, it is called overtraining (OT), and it
contributes to the resulting overtraining syndrome (OTS) . The
problem of overtraining was recogniz ed as far back as 1866 (101),
but the topic of overtraining has received much attention in the
scienti fic literature in recent years, and it is readily appar ent that this
is a complex and often confusing phenomenon (13, 38, 40, 43, 61,
65, 72, 74, 80, 88, 89, 104, 107, 135, 137, 139). Furthermor e, the
issue of overtraining is a problem in areas other than sport, such as
with tactical (i.e., military) personnel (134). A common finding in
many reviews and position stands is that more resear ch must be
performed to understand more fully what overtraining and
overreaching (OR)  is, how it affects the individual, and what
measur es can be taken to avoid this problem. In the present chapter
we will examine the known causes and results of the various stress
responses as they apply primari ly to strength and condi tioning
programs for high performance and will provide possible strategies
to avoid or r emedy o vertraining syndr ome.
1680
Periodization and the General
Adaptation Syndrome
When the total training program is correctly designed and
implemented, the individual can adapt and improve. This can closely
align with Selye’s general adap tation synd rome  (GAS; figure
24.1) (117) . In the GAS paradigm as applied to any biological
system, a stress creates an initial alarm phase, followed by a
resistance phase, and ultimately adaptation. If the stress is too
great, the system is unable to successfully resist the stressor and the
biological system dies. In the context of an athlete and a well-
designed strength and condi tioning program, this sequence initially
produces decreases in performance, followed by performance
recovery, and eventual ly performance improvements. This assumes
that the training program permi ts the athlete to resist the stress;
otherwise, persistent decreases in performance occur. These
performance decrements can be either long term due to
overtraining, or short term due to overreaching (see the
Overreaching Defined section later in the chapter) (93, 108, 125,
126). Therein lies the problem for the strength and condi tioning
professional: how to create the proper overload (i.e., training stress)
and how to correctly adjust the training load to permi t the athlete to
recover and attain enhanced performance. When done correctly, this
process can be part of a well-designed periodiz ed program (see
chapter 22). It must be remember ed that both the GAS and the
concept of periodization are paradigms, or models, and do not
necessari ly have to look exactly like illustrations such as figure 24.1.
Indeed, the validity of the GAS as applied to training (14),
periodization paradigms (130), and the concept that fatigue can
accumulate from resistance exercise programs (63) have been
questioned by some academics. Howev er, the vast majori ty of those
who study overtraining and work in the strength and conditioning
profession recognize the complexi ty of this topic (25). It also must
1681
be acknowledged that our understanding of overtraining and
overreaching is far from complete (88, 89, 135) and requires much
more study. The goal of this chapter is to help the practitioner and
athlete avoid unintended long-term decreases in performance, which
are exactly the opposi te of the intended tr aining goal.
FIGURE 24.1 Relationship between the gener al adaptation syndr ome paradigm and
stages of o vertraining and o verreaching.
Adapted by permission from V.M. Zatsiorsky, W.J. Kraemer, and A.C. Fry, Science and Practice of Strength Training, 3rd
ed. (Human Kinetics, 2021), 180.
One of the biggest challenges when training an individual or a
team is how to get the most from training. If working with athletes
training for maximum performance, this means implementing a
training program that will optimiz e performance for their sport. If
working in a tactical environment (e.g., military, law enforcement,
fire fighter , first responde r), the goal again is to optimiz e
performance for the tasks to be performed. Even for those in the
gener al popula tion who are hoping to optimiz e their health and
fitness, it is sometimes desirable to get the maximum effects from
the training program to satisfy their needs. In each of these
scenarios, the person designi ng the training program will most likely
not be satisfied with mediocr e results but is rather seekin g to obtain
1682
the best results possible despite potential limitations encounter ed.
These limitations can includ e a number of factors such as those
listed in figure 24.2.
Figure 24.2  Possible limiting factors when
designing an optimal strength and conditioning
program.
Time a vailable
Equipment and f acilities a vailable
Sport-speci fic training
Sport go verning body r egulations
Prior tr aining history
Travel and time z ones
Competi tion densi ty
Injury and ph ysical l imitations
Menstrual cy cle
Age
Job
Family demands and schedule
Recreational activi ties
In an effort to maximiz e the training effect, it may be necessary
to include blocks of training  that highly tax the individual in an
attempt to attain the greatest training response possible. Examples
of this can include the high-volume gener al preparation phases
found in many strength and condi tioning programs (see chapter 18
for more details). When implemented correctly, the resulting longer -
term training effect can be quite substantial. But a problem arises
when these phases of training have too high a volume or intensi ty
and are beyond the recovery capaci ty of the individual or team,
which can give way to overtraining. But what exactly is overtraining?
What are the lesser forms of overtraining, referred to as
overreaching ? And how do these differ from a stressful but well-
designed training block? Although the term overtraining  is commonly
1683
used in the sport coaching and strength and condi tioning
professions, we must first define exactly what we ar e talking about.
1684
Overtraining and Overreaching
A number of defini tions of overtraining and overreaching can be
found in the literature; howev er, in many cases the defini tions are
vague or extremely gener al. Some may think the concept of
overtraining is a relatively new topic. Howev er, as previously
mentioned, though not in the context of sport performance, the
issue was recogniz ed as early as 1866 concerning gener al physical
effort. It was stated that “the exertion shall not exceed the powers
of recruitment; and … the recruitment shall be facilitated by
adequate diet and rest” (101). Additional ly, much of the overtraining
literature is based on the seminal work of Hans Selye’s GAS (117),
which is also discussed in chapter 22. In the 1980s and 1990s, sport
scientists and sports medicine clinicians began to recogniz e the
problems of overtraining in sport and began to study and evaluate
this challenge as described in several reviews (13, 38, 72, 74, 80,
104, 126, 129, 139). The f ollowing things had become clear:
Not al l forms of o vertraining ar e identical (72, 129).
Not all types of performance decrements are the same (33,
34, 80, 104).
The contributing factors are variable (13, 38, 72, 80, 104, 126,
129, 139).
Figure 24.3 illustrates the training continuum from no training to
optimum training, which can include stressful training to various
overtraining scenarios. What should be abundantly clear in this
figure is that different sports (i.e., training goals) present different
types of overtraining. Likewise, different types of resistance exercise
also present different pathways to the problem of overtraining and
the resulting OTS. It must be remember ed that when proper training
programs are followed, the training and performance adaptations
can differ consider ably (e.g., a distance runner [aerobic endur ance
sport], wrestler [hybrid sport, both aerobic and anaer obic], or a
shot-putter [anaerobic, strength, and power]). Likewise, the factors
1685
contributing to overtraining for these same three athletes, and the
performance impairments and physiological responses, are also
different (13, 33, 34 , 38, 72, 80, 104 , 126, 138, 139).
Overtraining Defined
Due to the emergence of numer ous attempts to define and
understand overtraining (64, 71), a joint task force on the topic was
convened by the combined efforts of the European College of Sports
Science (ECSS) and the American College of Sports Medicine (ACSM)
(88). The result was their position statement titled “Preventions,
Diagnosis and Treatment of the Overtraining Syndrome” that
presented a consensus defini tion of overtraining and overreaching,
as well as what was scienti fically known about these problems at the
time. This was followed in 2013 by an updated position stand
summarizing what had been learned subsequent to 2006 (89). The
consensus of this working group was to adopt the following
defini tion of o vertraining:
An accumulation of training and/or non-tr aining stress resulting
in long-term  decrement in performance capaci ty with or
without related physiological and psychological signs and
symptoms of maladaptat ion in which restoration of
performance capaci ty may take several weeks or months  (88,
p. 2).
1686
FIGURE 24.3 Training continuum resulting in overtraining for numer ous forms of exercise
and tr aining. RE = r esistance ex ercise; O T = o vertraining; OR = o verreaching.
Adapted by permission from V.M. Zatsiorsky, W.J. Kraemer, and A.C. Fry, Science and Practice of Strength Training, 3rd
ed. (Human Kinetics, 2021), 179.
As can be seen in this defini tion, this is a serious condi tion for the
athlete from which recovery can take a long time, and it greatly
interferes or halts the competi tion training program. Since this
defini tion was proposed, more recent working groups have added
their definitions to the literature, as well as concerns with the state
of the overtraining resear ch (65, 135) that have helped illustrate the
challenges of understanding this phenomenon.
An important aspect of this defini tion that was also clarified in
these position stands is that overtraining is actual ly the process
(e.g., excessiv ely high volumes and intensi ties of training) that then
can result in an overtraining syndr ome (i.e., the collection of
symptoms and performance impairments) (figure 24.4) (88, 89). To
be overtrained, one actual ly has the OTS and the required long-term
performance impairments (i.e., weeks to months or longer).
Performance impairments are necessary for overtraining to have
occurred. Howev er, we will see that not all performance impairments
are alike.
1687
FIGURE 24.4 Overtraining is the process, and the overtraining syndr ome is the result. In
all instances, perf ormance impairment of some t ype wi ll be one of the r esults.
Overtraining is the process that can result in an
overtraining syndrome.
Overtraining Syndrome Defined
When the ECSS-ACSM Task Force defined overtraining (88, 89), they
specifically stated that the OTS was a combination of “related
physiological and psychological signs and symptoms of
maladaptation, ” some of which may not be part of the training
program. As such, the use of the term syndr ome indicat es the
complex nature of the condi tion and the fact that the symptoms are
associated wi th each other .
1688
A major challenge to understanding overtraining and its causes
and effects are the numer ous different terms found in the literature.
This is one reason several groups have developed position stands
(88, 89) and consensus statements (65) that include suggested
terminology . Likewise, many symptoms of an overtraining syndr ome
can vary between individuals and between di fferent types of training.
Howev er, it is important to note that in all cases, performance is
impair ed in some manner . Figure 24.5 lists a numbe r of the terms
used in the l iterature for overtraining and i ts effects.
Figure 24.5  Terminology commonly used for
overtraining, the overtraining syndrome, and
related topics.
Overtraining
Overreaching
Functional o verreaching
Nonfunctional o verreaching
Overtraining syndr ome
Stagnation
Overwork ed
Overstressed
Burnout
Overfatigued
Excessiv e fatigue
Imbalance of work and r ecovery
Underr ecovered
Failure to adapt
Stressful training syndr ome
Unexplained underperf ormance
Underperf ormance
Staleness
Maladaptation
Chronic f atigue
Adapted b y permission f rom V.M. Zatsiorsky , W.J. Kraemer , and A.C. Fry , Science
and Pr actice of Str ength T raining , 3rd ed. (Human Kinetics, 2021), 178.
1689
Resear ch on the OTS some times identi fies two types of OTS
related to the autonomic nervous system , specifically the
sympathetic overtraining syndrome  (some times referred to as
SOTS) and the parasympathetic overtraining syndrome
(sometimes referred to as POTS) (126). First presented by Israel in
1976 (61), these syndr omes were named based on how the
autonomic nerv ous system r esponded to the tr aining str esses.
Parasympathetic Overtraining Syndrome
Initially named the Addisonoid syndrome  since it is often
accompanied by decreased concentr ations of the stress hormone
cortisol, this condi tion is characteriz ed by the predominance of
parasympathetic activity. In gener al, the parasympathetic
overtraining syndr ome is most often found in aerobic endur ance
athletes where very large training volumes are common. Diagnosing
parasympathetic overtraining syndr ome in aerobic endur ance
athletes can be tricky since decreased resting heart rate (HR rest) is
typical ly a sign of beneficial cardiovascular adaptations to a training
program (e.g., decreased resting HR). Howev er, in this case, the
decreased HR in already highly trained individuals is due to a
parasympathetic overtraining  syndr ome and the prerequisi te training
program. It should be noted that the parasympathetic overtraining
syndr ome does not cause the performance impairments, but rather
is a collection of symptoms typical ly resulting from the huge training
volumes often used by aerobic endur ance athletes. Some of the
classic studies of the parasympathetic overtraining syndr ome can be
found in the work of Manfred Lehmann and his resear ch team’ s
study of extremely large training volumes of middle-distance runners
(80). Many of the results supported the presence of a
parasympathetic overtraining syndr ome (80), and the recovery
period was as long as a year (personal communi cation, M.
Lehmann). The primary symptom of a parasympathetic overtraining
syndr ome, besides decreased performance, is a diminished
sympathetic response (i.e., epinephrine,  or adrenaline ) to
1690