# Section 24.2

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 24: Overreaching, Overtraining, and Recovery

**Section:** 24.2 -- Functional Overreaching

**PDF Pages:** 1691--1700

training (78, 80). At times, this has been called adrenal
exhaustion  due to the inability of the adrenal glands to produce
adequate concentr ations of epinephrine.
Sympathetic Overtraining Syndrome
For a number of years, the existence of a sympathetic overtraining
syndr ome was hypothetical, until it was shown in a group of
resistance exercise overtrained subjects (36). It had been
hypothesiz ed that a sympath etic overtraining syndr ome would occur
before development of a parasympathetic overtraining syndr ome,
but enhanced sympathetic activity had never been previously shown
in response to an OT stimulus. The primary characteristic of
sympathetic overtraining syndr ome is an increased epinephrine
response to exercise and training (36, 37, 38, 40, 41, 139).
Eventual ly, the elevated catecholamines  result in a down-
regulation  of their primary receptor in skeletal muscle, β-2
receptors (41, 124). This is believed to be an important part of the
sympathetic overtraining syndr ome and the accompan ying impair ed
contractility of sk eletal muscle in this condi tion.
Overreaching Defined
A lesser form of stressful training than overtraining is called
overreaching (OR)  and is defined as f ollows:
An accumulation of training and/or non-tr aining stress resulting
in short-term  decrement in performance capaci ty with or
without related physiological and psychological signs and
symptoms of maladaptat ion in which restoration of
performance capaci ty may take from several days to several
weeks  (88, 89).
This defini tion is almost the same as overtraining; howev er, the
severity of the condi tion is less, and recovery is faster. It must be
appreciated here that there are multiple degrees of performance
impairment, including two types of overreaching (figure 24.6). The
most subtle type is performance stagnation . While somet imes
1691
stagnated performances have been consider ed a type of overtraining
(13), this is difficult to differentiate from good training programs
since all seriously trained individuals experience periodic plateaus in
performance. Howev er, if stagnation occurs due to an inappr opriate
training load (33), adjustments must be made.
FIGURE 24.6 Different types of performance impairment due to an overtraining
syndr ome. Being overreached or overtrained results in decreased performance. The primary
differences include the recovery times, whether performance is ultimately enhanced, and
the magni tude of other symptoms that oc cur.
Functional Overreaching
Many training programs purposely include micro- or mesocy cles of
greater training  volumes or intensi ties as part of the long-term plan.
Examples of these include preseason training camps for many sports
that include two or three training sessions a day or gener al
preparation training blocks in the strength and condi tioning program.
When properly prescribed, these can be very effective training
1692
methods that prepare the athlete for later performance gains (88,
89, 106, 126). The short-term effect is decrements in performance,
but recovery can be attained within days or weeks and can result in
a super compen sation effect. As such, and although stressful to the
athlete, functional overreaching (FOR)  can be beneficial
provided appropriate recovery is allowed. It should be noted that
functional overreaching is a commonly used training strategy by
many successful coaches. Figure 24.1 on page 778 illustrates how
functional o verreaching can fi t into the GA S paradigm.
Nonfunctional Overreaching
On the other hand, nonfunctional overreaching (NFOR)  is
somewhat similar to functional overreaching with two very important
differences. First, the short-term accumulated fatigue is greater, and,
second, the recovery takes longer (88, 89, 126). In the case of
NFOR, the individual does not experience any super compensation
and is only able to return to his or her baseline performance levels
(see figure 24.1 on page 778) (88, 89, 93, 108, 125, 126). As the
name implies, this type of training does not serve any useful function
since no performance benefi ts result, and the athlete has been
unnecessari ly stressed.
Overtraining and Overreaching Share
Properties With Other Conditions
A number of other problematic condi tions share symptoms and characteristics with
OT and OTS. For example, similarities between OT and the OTS with clinical
depression (4, 5), post-traumatic stress disorder (6), and other relevant
psychological condi tions (53) ha ve been noted.
Additional ly, many characteristics of relative energy deficiency syndro me
(RED-S) , formerly known as the female athlete triad, are similar to symptoms
often found in OTS (122). Although the root causes of each of these illnesses or
diseases may be different from OT and OTS, they can each certainly contrib ute to
an OTS. Both RED-S and OTS can be interr elated since many causes  and
symptoms of each condition contribute to the other. Therefore, when the presence
of RED-S is suspec ted, it is important to clearly discern how overtraining may be
contributing to this problem. To adequately address the serious condi tion of RED-S,
1693
trained professionals need to be involved, but the strength and condi tioning
professional must be able to r ecogniz e when help of this t ype is needed.
1694
Overtraining Continuum
All the different types and severities of overtraining and overreaching
can collectively make an overtraining continuum (figure 24.7).
Although some overlap may exist between each of the categories,
this continuum illustrates how each successiv e level becomes more
serious for the athlete and requires longer and more intense
recovery.
FIGURE 24.7 The overreaching/o vertraining continuum. SOTS = sympathetic
overtraining syndr ome; PO TS = par asympathetic o vertraining syndr ome.
It should be appar ent now that not all forms of overtraining are
identical (28, 126, 129), and the resulting OTS is not a simple
problem with simple solutions. Indeed, it has been repeatedly
reported that many factors contribute to this problem, and whether
it is due to training for aerobic endur ance sports (28, 46) or
resistance exercise (37, 43), it is extremely complex (46, 49, 84, 88,
89, 139) and multidiscipl inary (75, 107). The net result is that there
are many risk factors for overtraining (110, 139) that must be
recogniz ed to avoid this problem. As evidenced by some who believe
there is no evidence of fatigue accumulation from resistance exercise
(63), much more resear ch is needed (48, 135). It is highly likely that
understanding this complexi ty will require novel and emerging
resear ch methods and approaches such as advanced  statistical
1695
model ing and work in the field of -omics  (e.g., proteom ics and
genomics) (4 , 30).
1696
Factors Contributing to Overreaching
and Overtraining
The first step in understanding overtraining and overreaching is
identi fying the balance between stress  and recovery  (53). Stress
from a strength and condi tioning program must be counter ed with
adequate recovery to permi t long-term progression (figure 24.8).
The inability to adequately recover will undoubtedly result in an
overtraining scenario . Likewise, an inadequate training load will likely
produce suboptimal performance. The challenge for the strength and
condi tioning professional is to find the appropriate balance to
maximiz e the long-term perf ormance adaptations.
FIGURE 24.8 Although many factors can contribute to poor performance, overtraining,
as the name impl ies, is due to ex cessiv e training, inadequate r ecovery, or both.
Training Factors
Since we are focusing on overtraining and overreaching in the
strength and condi tioning context, the first and most obvious
contributing factors are found in the strength and condi tioning
program in question. A quick review of the numer ous variables in the
resistance exercise program illustrates the many ways the program
can be adjuste d to the needs of the individual being trained (139;
see chapter 18). In gener al, the volume of training (e.g., total
repetitions, volume-load, mechanical work, metabo lic work,
frequency of training) and the intensi ty of training (e.g., relative
intensi ty [%RM], absolute intensi ty [kg], perceptions of effort) are
1697
important variables when determining the training stress (figure
24.9). Excessive amounts of either training volume or intensi ty can
combine to produce an overtraining stimulus. Monitoring the
characteristics of the training program may be one of the most
important methods for prescribing load. Additional ly, the long-term
periodiz ed training program also must be correctly applied. Even
though a periodiz ed program can be effective (see chapter 22), it
can also be incorr ectly designed, resulting in overtraining.
Additional ly, an appropriately designed training taper can also
enhance performance testing (96). Another training error is a lack of
variation in the training load (126), which can be quanti fied by
calculating the coefficient of variation  (%CV; SD/ x–) for the
training load (29, 82, 139). Finally, the most important part of an
athlete’ s training stress is the sport-speci fic training and practices,
not to mention the str esses of competi tion.
FIGURE 24.9 Excessiv e levels of training volume and intensi ty can contribute to
overtraining.
Allostatic Load
Often overlooked aspects of an overtraining syndr ome are
contributing factors outside the training hall or the competi tion
arena. These are many and varied, and in the context of overtraining
they have been termed the allostatic load (86, 107). Collectively,
the cumulativ e causes of stress (i.e., antecedents ) produce the
various stress responses (i.e., allostatic load) (71, 86). The allostatic
load is created by various antecedents (i.e., contributing factors) that
1698
produce adverse responses of the body that are part of the stress
responses. To better understand the stress, various algori thms have
been created to help make sense of all the antece dents that
contribute to this problem (21). In this stress model, if the allostatic
load is too great, illness or disease can result. A simple description of
the allostatic load is the wear and tear on the body (103). The
concept of allostatic load was original ly presented in 1993 (86) and
is a central concept for the study of how humans respond and adapt
to stresses (71). If we now apply the concept of allostat ic loads to
overtraining syndrome, we see that the totality of stresses to the
body include primary factors that are part of the training and
recovery process and secondary factors that also contribute to the
overtraining syndr ome but are not part of training and competi tion.
Collectively, the allostatic load can create a large stress that must be
consider ed by the strength  and condi tioning professional when
planning tr aining pr ograms to a void overtraining.
Figure 24.10 illustrates how these secondary factors can
contribute to an overtraining  syndr ome. One important note is that
these secondary factors that can contribute to the overtraining
syndr ome can also be caused by an overtraining syndr ome. The
challenge is to determine if these factors exist outside the training
program and add to the overtraining stress or if they are created by
overtraining. Many factors have been identi fied as possibly
contributing to overtraining syndr ome (107, 110) and are shown in
figure 24.10 (1, 8, 26, 29, 31, 34, 36, 37, 39, 40, 41, 45, 52, 54-57 ,
60, 62, 76, 80, 81, 88, 98, 102, 111, 118-120).
1699
FIGURE 24.10  Allostatic load includes all contributing factors to overtraining and
overtraining syndr ome (OTS). Solid lines notate required factors or direct causes. Dashed
lines show contributing f actors, not dir ect causes.
1700