# Section 25.3

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 25: Facility Design, Layout, and Organization

**Section:** 25.3 -- Facility Maintenance

**PDF Pages:** 1761--1774

weight room floor plans for secondary school and university settings.
Notice the walkway spacin g and arrangement, as well as the
organization and grouping of the equipment. Also note the
placement of the supervisor ’s office, window placement, and storage
areas.
1761
Maintaining and Cleaning Surfaces and
Equipment
Surfaces in the strength and condi tioning facility should be cleaned,
sanitized, and disinfected consistently to ensur e that the equipment
is safe and functional. Proper maintenance will reduce cost in the
long run, because cleaning supplies are cheaper than replacing
padding, flooring, exercise mats, and so on. Microbes will begin to
grow if the surfaces are not wiped down with a germicid al cleaner .
Equipment and surfaces that are used more often and have a
greater chance of developing bacterial growth (e.g., padding and
vinyl), should be cleaned daily or every other day. It is important
that any germicidal cleaner used in the strength facility have the
ability to prevent the spread of germs, including bacteria, viruses,
parasites, and fungi, and illness, such as the flu, COVID-19, HIV,
hepati tis, and ringworm (or other infectious rashes). After cleaning
surfaces and equipment to remove any dirt and debris, the CDC
recommends sanitizing and disinfecting surfaces with an EPA-
register ed disinfecting product to eliminate and inactiv ate germs to
reduce the spread of illness (20). For laundry items, such as cleaning
rags and gym towels, use detergent and the hottest available water
setting, and dry i tems completely .
Nonabsorbent floors should be regularly mopped for removal of
dust and grime buildup. Wood weightl ifting platforms should also be
check ed for splintering and cracking and cleaned with an appropriate
cleaner to remove dust and dirt that could cause foot slippage.
When cleaning around racks and machinery , the bolts and screws
that hold the equipment to the floor should also be tightened or
check ed regula rly (4). Machines that have cables and pulleys should
be regularly check ed and should be repaired if the cables and pulleys
are loose or fraying. If the facility has a tiled or rolled rubber floor,
minimal gaps should appear between the pieces and no visible glue
1762
should extrude between the cracks. Carpet should be vacuumed and
cleaned r egularly to pr event mold, mi ldew, or fungal gr owth.
Walls and ceilings should also be cleaned at least once every
week or two. The walls and ceilings should have no dirt buildup, and
there should not be any dust in the corners. Dust and cobwebs tend
to build up high in the corners where the walls meet the ceiling and
should be removed. If the facility has windows and mirrors, they
should be regularly check ed for cracking and replaced as soon as a
crack is noticed. Clean windows and mirrors also enhance the
appear ance of the facility. Use a window cleaner and microfiber
towel to leave the surface streak free. Dirt and dust can build up on
flat edges of items affixed to the wall or fixtures hanging from the
ceiling. Any windowsi lls, shelves, or anything hanging from the
ceiling should be dusted regularly . If exercise equipment is hanging
from the ceiling, it should be regularly check ed to ensur e that it is
tightly secur ed and will not fall down (4). Figure 25.5 on page 814
presents a list to refer to when creating a cleaning schedule for the
floors, w alls, and cei lings.
Scheduling frequent maintenance and cleaning ensures
safety, protects equipment, and maintains the
appearance of the strength and conditioning facility.
Maintenance should include not only the surface materials but
also the equipment. The equipment should be regularly check ed for
broken or damaged parts, particularly those that affect functional ity.
If the equipment is used often and not cleaned enough, residue can
build up that may cause functional or health issues. Nonfunctional
equipment should be labeled with an “Out of Order” sign (2). If
there is a delay before fixing broken equipment, it should be
removed from the floor and placed in storage. As with surfaces,
equipment repairs can end up costing more if it is not maintained
and cleaned properly . Malfunctioning equipment also increases the
1763
risk of legal liability to strength and condi tioning professionals and
institutions (16).
The NSCA ’s safety checkl ist for exercise facility and equipment
maintenance (figure 25.6; pages 815-817 ) is helpful for determining
the maintenance needs of exercise equipment. A cleaning schedule
should be made that specifies the equipment to be cleaned daily,
weekly , biweekly , or monthly . The checkl ist also covers facility layout
issues, especial ly those r elating to saf ety.
Cleaning and maintenance materials should be kept in a locked
storage closet for use when needed. Any hazar dous cleaning
products and chemicals should be clearly labeled and only accessible
to adults. Any tools should be stored in a toolbo x that is put away
and out of sight of the weight room. Tools and cleaning materials
should also be regularly inventoried and restock ed. A list of
maintenance equipment and cleaning supplies is provided in table
25.3.
TABLE 25.3  Equipment and Supplies for
Maintenance and Cleaning
Maintenance equipment Cleaning supplies
File
Hammer
Pliers
Screwdriv er set
Allen wr ench set
Adjustable wr ench set
Knife, hea vy-duty scissors, and/or
box cutter
Stapler
Duct tape
Extra nuts, bol ts, and w ashers
Heavy-duty glue
Drill and dri ll bit set
Vise grips
Adjustable ladder or step stoolDisinf ectant (germicide)
Special ty cleaners (e.g. , wood, w alls, upholstery)
Glass cleaner
Lubrication
Paper towels
Spray bottles
Cloth towels and r ags
Sponges
Brooms and dustpans
Vacuum cleaner and/or wet v acuum cleaner
Mop and buck et
Stain r emover
Wire brush
Cleaning extension poles (f or out -of-reach cei lings,
mirrors, and w alls)
1764
Conclusion
Designing a strength and conditioning facility is an extensiv e process
that involves a significant amount of planning. The process begins
with the formation of a comm ittee that will contribute to the design
and constructio n of the facility. The next step involves assessing the
specific needs of the strength and condi tioning department. This is
the phase in which the number and experience level of athletes
being trained, preferences from strength and condi tioning
professionals and staff, schedul ing, and equipment needs should be
determined. After these determinations have been made, the
process of designing the facility and arranging the equipment can
begin. Care should be taken and guidel ines followed in arranging
and spacing equipment to optimiz e safety, function, and tr affic flow .
After the design process is complete, the facility and the
equipment must be properly maintained and cared for to ensure safe
training and protect financial  investments. Regular mainte nance and
cleaning of equipment and surfaces are vital for the longevi ty of the
facility, in addition to health and safety. Cleaning and maintenance
should focus the most on high-tr affic areas and equipm ent that is
used more often. This will help to prevent the spread of infections
and disease among the facility users as well as promote proper
hygiene and maintain the appear ance of the environment. It is also
suggested that once the facility is operational, key stakeholders meet
periodical ly to discuss outcomes and plans f or future changes (9).
KEY TERMS
construction phase
design phase
feasibi lity study
master plan
minimal ly compl iant facility
needs analysis
1765
predesign phase
preoper ation phase
safety cushion
SWOT analysis
STUDY QUESTIONS
  1.  What is consider ed the optimal temper ature range for a
strength and condi tioning f acility?
  a.  58 °F to 64 °F (14-18 °C)
  b.  64 °F to 68 °F (18-20 °C)
  c.  68 °F to 74 °F (20-23 °C)
  d.  74 °F to 78 °F (23-26 °C)
  2.  What is the minimum recommended amount of space per
person wi thin a str ength and condi tioning f acility?
  a.  70 squar e feet (6.5 m2)
  b.  100 squar e feet (9.3 m2)
  c.  130 squar e feet (12.1 m2)
  d.  144 squar e feet (13.4 m2)
  3.  What is the minimum recommended spacing on each side of a
power r ack?
  a.  3 ft (0.9 m)
  b.  4 ft (1.2 m)
  c.  6 ft (1.8 m)
  d.  7 ft (2.1 m)
  4.  What is the recommende d width for designated walkways in a
strength and condi tioning f acility?
  a.  2 to 3 f eet (0.6-0.9 m)
  b.  3 to 5 f eet (0.9-1.5 m)
  c.  5 to 7 f eet (1.5-2.1 m)
  d.  >7 f eet (>2.1 m)
  5.  What is an important consider ation for safely using suspension
trainers?
1766
  a.  R egularly check that al l suspension anchors, ac cessories,
and at tachments ar e properly secur ed for use wi th
consider ation of the load-bearing natur e of the ex ercise.
  b.  Finding a r einforced doorw ay to secur e suspension
training devices is best to optimiz e movement thr oughout
a strength and condi tioning f acility.
  c.  Single-lock car abiners must be used to at tach suspension
trainers to anchor points.
  d.  Saf ety cushion spacing does not apply to suspension
trainers.
1767
FIGURE 25.3 Example of a secondary school strength and condi tioning facility floor plan
(3 ft = 0.9 m).
1768
FIGURE 25.4 Example of a university strength and condi tioning facility floor plan (3 ft =
0.9 m).
1769
Figure 25.5  Checklist for cleaning floors, walls,
ceilings, and surfaces.
Floors
Check floors f or dirt, grime, and chalk bui ldup.
Nonabsorbent floors should be r egularly swept and mopped.
Check carpet f or any moistur e, mold, mi ldew, or fungal gr owth.
Carpet should be v acuumed and cleaned r egularly .
Walls
Check w alls for dirt and dust bui ldup.
Dust and clean w alls at least once ev ery week or two .
Clean mirr ors and windows of smudges at least once per week.
Ceilings
Ceilings and ceiling fixtures should be dusted or cleaned at least once every
week or two .
Open cei lings wi th exposed pipes and ducts should be cleaned as needed.
Check for dust and cobweb buildup (especial ly near corners and HVAC
vents).
Surfaces
Dust windowsi lls and shelving surf aces at least once per week.
Exercise surfaces, mats, and pads that contact skin should be cleaned daily
with germicidal cleaner .
Clean and sanitize hydration and nutrition spaces (drinking fountains, water
bottle refill stations, countertops) dai ly and addi tional ly as needed.
From National Str ength and Condi tioning Association,  Essentials of Str ength
Training and Condi tioning , 5th ed. , edited by G.G. Haf f and N.T . Triplett (Human
Kinetics, 2027).
Figure 25.6  NSCA’s safety checklist for exercise
facility and equipment maintenance.
Exercise Facility
Flooring and Turf Areas
1770
Wooden platforms should be free of splinters, cracks, holes, protruding nails,
loose scr ews, and w arping.
Tighten bolts and screws and ensur e they are secur e in attaching equipment
to the floor .
Tile flooring should be resistant to slipping; no moistur e or chalk
accumulation should appear .
Rubber flooring should be slip resista nt and free of cuts, slits, and gaps
between pieces.
Interlocking mats ar e secur e and arr anged wi th no pr otruding tabs.
Carpet should be f ree of tears; an y worn ar eas should be pr otected b y mats.
Flooring and turf ar e glued or f astened down pr operly .
Walls
Walls in high-activity areas are free of protruding appliances, equipment, or
wall hangings.
Mirrors and shelv es are secur ely fix ed to w alls.
Mirrors ar e placed a minimum of 20 inches (51 cm) of f the floor in al l areas.
Mirrors and windows are not cracked, broken, or distorted (replace
immediately i f damaged).
Bolts and screws are tightened and secure in attaching any balance railing to
the w alls.
Wall hooks and suspension anchors ar e secur e for use wi th attachments.
Ceiling
Ceiling fans, HV AC, and air ex change systems work pr operly .
Lighting is designed to optimiz e visibi lity at floor lev el.
Ceiling height is sufficient for overhea d exercises (12 ft [3.7 m] minimum)
and free of low -hanging appar atus (e.g. , beams, pipes, l ighting, signs).
Ceiling fixtures and attachments are secur e, preventing the risk of falling
objects.
Any damaged or missing cei ling tiles ar e replaced as soon as possible.
Exercise Equipment
Stretching and Bodyweight Exercise Area
Mat ar ea is f ree of weight benches and equipment.
Mats and bench upholstery ar e free of cr acks and tears.
Equipment is pr operly stor ed after use.
Elastic bands ar e secur ed to their base and check ed for wear .
1771
Nonsl ip material appears on the top surface and bottom or base of
plyometric bo xes.
Resistance Training Machine Area
Each station is easily accessed (a minimum of 30 in. [76 cm] between
machines; 36 in. [91 cm] is optimal).
Area is f ree of loose bol ts, scr ews, cables, and chains.
Proper selectoriz ed pins are used and there is adequate storage or hanging
space f or equipment ac cessories.
Securing str aps and locking mechanisms must be f unctional.
Functional parts ar e properly lubricated.
Protectiv e padding is f ree of cr acks and tears.
No pr otruding scr ews or parts need tightening or r emoved.
Belts, chains, and cables ar e aligned wi th machine parts.
No worn parts (e.g., frayed cable, loose chains, worn bolts, cracked joints)
exist.
Resistance Training Free Weight Area
Each bench or area is easily accessible  (a minimum of 30 in. [76 cm] access
clearance; 36 in. [91 cm] is optimal).
Olympic bars are properly spaced (a minimum of 36 inches [91 cm])
between ends.
Dumbbel l racks and other equipment are placed at least 6 inches (15 cm)
away from mirr ors.
All equipment is r eturned after use to a void obstruction of path way.
Safety equipment (e.g. , belts, col lars, saf ety bars) is used and r eturned.
Protectiv e padding is f ree of cr acks and tears.
Bolts and appar atus parts (e.g., collars and attachments) are secur e and
tightly f astened.
Olympic bars turn pr operly and ar e properly lubricated and tightened.
Benches, weight racks, standar ds, and similar equipment are secur ed to the
floor or w all.
Nonfunctional or broken equipment is removed from the area or labeled with
an “out of service” sign.
Weightlifting Area
Olympic bars are properly spaced (a minimum of 36 in. [91 cm]) between
ends.
All equipment is r eturned after use to a void obstruction of l ifting ar ea.
Olympic bars turn pr operly and ar e properly lubricated and tightened.
1772
Bent or rusted Olympic bars are replaced; knurling is brushed and clear of
debris.
Collars ar e functional.
Bumper plates are inspected regularly; bumper plates should be free of
cracks and an y loose bol ts.
Sufficient grip chalk is a vailable.
Wrist straps, belts, and knee wraps are available, functional, and stored
properly .
Benches, chairs, and bo xes are kept at a distance f rom weightl ifting ar ea.
Aerobic Exercise and Exercise Testing Areas
Each station is easily accessible (minimum of 30 in. [76 cm] between
machines; 36 in. [91 cm] is optimal).
Bolts and scr ews ar e secur e and tightened.
Functioning parts ar e easi ly adjustable.
Parts and surf aces ar e properly lubricated and cleaned.
Foot and body str aps ar e secur e and not ripped.
Recalibration and r egular technology device maintenance ar e perf ormed.
Measur ement devices ar e properly f unctioning.
Power cords do not extend into exercise areas, safety spacing, walkways, or
spotter ar eas.
Frequency of Maintenance and Cleaning Tasks
Daily
Inspect al l flooring and wooden platf orms f or damage or wear .
Clean (sweep , vacuum, or mop and disinf ect) al l flooring.
Inspect upholstery f or damage or wear .
Clean and disinf ect upholstery .
Clean and disinf ect hydration and nutri tion ar eas.
Inspect fix ed equipment ’s connection wi th floor , walls, or cei ling.
Clean and disinf ect equipment surf aces that contact skin.
Inspect mirr ors and windows f or damage.
Clean mirr ors and windows of smudges.
Inspect that wall hooks and suspension anchors are secur e for use with
attachments.
Inspect all equipment for damage; wear; fraying; loose or protruding belts,
screws, cables, or chains; insecur e or nonfunctioning foot and body straps;
improper f unctioning or impr oper use of at tachments, pins, or other devices.
1773
Inspect al l protectiv e padding f or cracks and tears.
Inspect nonsl ip material and mats f or proper placement, damage, and wear .
Clean and sani tize exercise mats.
Remove trash and garbage.
Ensur e equipment is r eturned and stor ed properly after use.
Two or Three Times Per Week
Clean and lubricate al l moving parts of equipment and aer obic machines.
Clean and lubricate the guide rods on selectoriz ed resistance training
machines.
Ensur e Olympic bars turn pr operly and ar e properly lubricated and tightened.
Once Per Week or Two
Clean and dust cei ling fixtur es and at tachments.
Clean cei ling tiles.
Clean w alls.
Clean l ight co vers, fans, air v ents, clocks, and speak ers.
As Needed
Replace l ight bulbs.
Replace damaged or missing cei ling tiles.
Clean open cei lings wi th exposed pipes or ducts.
Remove or place “out of or der” sign on br oken equipment.
Fill chalk bo xes.
Clean bar knurl ing.
Remove rust from floor, plates, bars, and equipment with a rust-removing
solution.
Wash and sani tize rags and gym towels per use.
From National Str ength and Condi tioning Association,  Essentials of Str ength
Training and Condi tioning , 5th ed. , edited by G.G. Haf f and N.T . Triplett (Human
Kinetics, 2027).
1774