# Chapter 26: Facility Policies, Procedures, and Legal Issues

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

**PDF Pages:** 1775--1876

CHAPTER  26
FACILITY POLICIES,
PROCEDURES, AND LEGAL
ISSUES
Brijesh Patel, MA, and Reed Wainwright, JD
The authors would like to acknowledge the significant contributions of Traci Statler ,
Victor Brown, Boyd Epley, John Taylor, Michael Greenwood, and Lori Greenwood to this
chapter .
After completing this chapter, you will be able to
develop or clari fy the goals and objectiv es of a str ength and
condi tioning pr ogram;
understand the dai ly oper ational pr actices of a str ength and
condi tioning pr ogram and f acility that help to achiev e the goals
and objectiv es;
understand the di fferences in r oles and r esponsibi lities of each
member of the str ength and condi tioning perf ormance team;
establ ish a standar d of pr actice that leads to a saf e and
effective strength and condi tioning pr ogram;
identi fy common ar eas of potential l iability exposur e and
implement appr opriate risk management str ategies;
create a pol icies and pr ocedur es manual f or a str ength and
condi tioning pr ogram and f acility; and
1775
properly schedule the str ength and condi tioning f acility, along
with formulating guidel ines on seasonal planning and staf f-to-
athlete r atios.
The strength and condi tioning profession continues to evolve.
Typical ly, a practitioner ’s knowledge and skill developme nt involves
competencies in exercise science, administr ation, management,
teaching, and coaching (30). With student -athlete safety and welfare
at the forefront, developing a policies and procedur es manual
provides a blueprint for implementing safe and effective programs
and services.
Policies  are essential ly a facility’s rules and regulations; they
reflect the goals and objectiv es of the program. Procedures
describe how policies are met or carried out. It is necessary to
examine program goals and objectiv es, because they are the basis
on which policies and procedur es are created. Additional ly, specific
policies and procedur es should include elements that protect the
program and its emplo yees from a risk of litigation ; issues such as
guidel ines for supervision and instruction, facility administ ration, and
emergency action planning and response should be included. The
goal of this chapter is to identi fy areas of risk exposur e and means
of increasing safety, as well as to guide the strength and
condi tioning professional in providing and enhancing the quality of
services and pr ograms.
1776
Mission Statement and Program Goals
A mission statement  is an organization’ s statement of purpose
(2). Creating a mission statement requires forward thinking with the
end result in mind. A good mission statement provides the strength
and condi tioning program with focus and direction and is the
foundation of effective administr ation. According to the Druck er
Foundation (31), the following are suggested criteria for an effective
mission statement:
It should be short and sharply f ocused.
It should be clear and easy to understand.
It defines wh y the or ganization exists.
It does not pr escribe means.
It is br oad in scope.
It provides dir ection f or upholding a code of ethics.
It addr esses and matches the or ganization’ s scope of pr actice.
It inspir es commi tment.
The mission statement addresses three important components:
target clientele (key market), what service is being provided
(contribution), and what makes the service unique (distinction) (2).
The following is an example of a mission statement of a strength
and condi tioning pr ogram:
To optimiz e each athlete’ s physical potential while also reducing
risk of injury; educating them through compr ehensiv e, well-
organized, and managed training programs; all done in a safe,
positive, demanding, and discipl ined en vironment.
A mission statement is an organization’s statement of
purpose, providing the strength and conditioning
program with focus and direction.
Program goals  are the desired end products of a strength and
condi tioning program, stated in a broad, gener al manner . An
1777
effective strength and condi tioning program should be based on
scienti fic principles to enhance performance and increase injury
resistance with intended outcomes specific to the sport and the
athlete’ s posi tion wi thin the sport (7).
Developing a standar d of care is a collaborative responsibi lity. In
the law of negligence, standar d of care is the degree of care that a
reasonable person should exercise (17). Standar d of care for the
strength and condi tioning professional refers to the degree of
caution and prudence that a reasonable person would exercise in
similar situatio ns. The strength and condi tioning professional is
expected to act according to their education, training, and
certification. Therefore, developing a mission statement and a list of
program objectiv es should involve not only the strength and
condi tioning department but also the institution, including, but not
limited to, the athletic administr ation and the sports medicine
department. The more people participating, the better, so that all
involved groups and individuals take ownership and commi t to
achieving the strength and condi tioning program’s mission, goals,
and objectiv es.
1778
Program Objectives
Program objectives  are specific means of attaining program goals.
If program goals are stated but the ways in which these goals might
be attained are not specified, the result may be that athletes never
achiev e them. Program objectiv es should encompass all areas of the
program to ensur e that the goals are attained. Following is a sample
list of objectiv es that can lead to reaching program goals and
prepare a strength and condi tioning professional to handle the job
requirements:
Design and administer strength, flexibi lity, aerobic, plyometric,
and other training programs that reduce the likelihood of
injuries and improve athletic performance. More precisely,
design training programs that create the desired results in
body composi tion, hypertr ophy, strength, muscular endur ance,
aerobic endur ance, speed, agility, and power and enhance
movement ef ficiency .
Develop training programs to account for biomechanical  and
physiological differences between individual athletes, taking
into consider ation their ages, sex, training status, physical
limitations, and injury status.
Recogniz e acute and chronic physiological responses and
adaptations to training and their implications for the design of
sport-speci fic training pr ograms.
Educate athlete s on the importance of proper nutrition as well
as sleep and i ts role in heal th and perf ormance.
Educate athlet es about the effects of performance-enhancing
substances and their abuse, relevant school policy, and
legislation.
The performance team  concept —that is, the use of individuals
with specific areas of experti se as resour ces—can be applied in the
creation of a strength and conditioning program that works toward
meeting the preceding objectiv es. For example, when an athlete
1779
requires rehabi litation and recondi tioning, the sports medicine staff
should be consul ted. The director of strength and condi tioning needs
to establ ish written policies and procedur es for determining
appropriate use of staff in the delivery of safe, effective, and
efficient service. Additional ly, an annual orientation meeting should
be held at the beginning of the school year or sport season to
familiarize staff, sport coaches, and participants with the establ ished
goals, objectiv es, policies, and procedur es. Periodical ly reevaluate
and review goals and objectiv es.
1780
Strength and Conditioning Performance
Team
The responsibi lities of the strength and condi tioning professional are
continual ly changing as the field grows and becomes better
recogniz ed (22). The strength and condi tioning staff can be aligned
through the hiring of practitioners with formal education and
special ization in specific scienti fic foundations (e.g., anatom y,
exercise physiology , biomechanics). An assembled team allows for
cooper ative expertise by practitioners with complementary  skills and
provides an educational opportuni ty for staff members to gain
knowledge outside of their special ization. Table 26.1 provides a
practical example of a strength and condi tioning performance team.
The director of strength and condi tioning is responsible for
delineating the appropriate duties and responsibi lities to the strength
and conditioning staff for program design, exercise technique,
organization and administr ation, and testing and ev aluation.
TABLE 26.1  Sample Strength and Conditioning
Performance Team
Scientific foundations
education and
expertisePractical and applied
activities and responsibilities Liaison assignment
Exercise and sport
anatom y, biomechanicsExercise techniques, testing and
evaluation, r ehabi litation and
recondi tioningExercise and sport science
faculty, team coaches, sports
medicine team
Exercise and sport
physiologyProgram design; testing and
evaluationExercise and sport science
faculty, team coaches
Exercise and sports
nutritionNutritionist Exercise and sport science
faculty
Adapted by permission from NSCA,  Strength and Condi tioning Professiona l Standar ds and
Guidel ines (NSCA, 2017).
1781
Scientific foundations
education and
expertisePractical and applied
activities and responsibilities Liaison assignment
Exercise and sport
pedagogyProgram design; ex ercise
technique; or ganization and
administr ationExercise and sport science
faculty, athletic
administr ation
Exercise and sport
psychology , motor
learningExercise technique; r ehabi litation
and recondi tioningExercise and sport science
faculty, sports medicine team
Training methodology Program design, or ganization,
and administr ationExercise and sport science
faculty, athletic
administr ation
Kinesiology ,
physiother apy, sports
medicineRehabi litation and r econdi tioning Sports medicine team
Adapted by permission from NSCA,  Strength and Condi tioning Professiona l Standar ds and
Guidel ines (NSCA, 2017).
Although job responsibi lities vary according to institution, it would
be prudent to consul t NSCA Strength and Condi tioning Professional
Standar ds and Guidel ines (30) when one is developin g a strength
and condi tioning performance team. Guidel ine 2.3 of this document
states the f ollowing:
The productivi ty of a Strength and Condi tioning staff, as well as
learning and skill development of individual members, should
be enhanced by aligning a performance team comprised of
qualified practitioners with interdependent expertise and
shared leadership roles. Once the team is assembled,
respectiv e activities and responsibi lities from the domains
identi fied in the Certified Strength and Condi tioning Specialist
(CSCS) Exami nation Content Description, as well as the
appropriate liaison assignmen ts, should be delegated according
to each member ’s particular expertise.
1782
Director of Strength and Conditioning
(Head Strength and Conditioning
Professional)
The director of strength and condi tioning (referred to hereafter as
director)—also commonly referred to as the head strength and
condi tioning professional —is both a practitioner and an
administr ator. This person is responsible for the overall strength and
condi tioning program, facility, equipment, staff, and such
administr ative tasks as preparing a budget, purchasing equipment,
preparing proposals, and working with administr ation and media.
Figure 26.1 shows a sample job listing for such a position. A job
announcement similar to these can be used to attract quality
applicants. Figure 26.2 provides a sample gener al job description
that outlines responsibi lities for a director of strength and
condi tioning.
Figure 26.1  Sample director of strength and
conditioning job listing.
Responsibi lities and duties as assigned by the director of athletics include
developing and monitoring performance training programs for athletic teams,
implementing safe and effective program design based on scienti fic principles,
instructing proper resistance training exercise techniques, speed and agility
development, and testing and evaluation. The head strength and condi tioning
professional will oversee policies and procedur es, facility organization, record
management, and risk management for the strength and condi tioning
performance team in collaboration with the institution. The strength  and
condi tioning professional should work cooper atively with the medical, sports
psychology , and nutrition staff in the interest of student -athlete developm ent,
health, and well-being. A bachelor ’s degree is required, with a master ’s degree
preferred (with emphasis in the exercise sciences). The strength and condi tioning
professional must possess certification from an independent accreditation agency
(e.g., Certified Strength and Condi tioning Special ist by the National Strength  and
Condi tioning Associ ation) and maintain continuing education requirements.  First
aid, cardiopulmonary resusci tation, and automated external defibr illator
certifications required. Two years’ experience is required in progressively
responsible positions involving development and management of sport-specific
individual and group performance training programs. Excellent management,
1783
leadership , communication, supervisory , and management skills are required.
Salary is commensur ate wi th backgr ound and experience.
Based on Casa et al. (2012).
Figure 26.2  Sample strength and conditioning
director job description.
Direct al l facets of staf f, program, and f acility oper ations
Design (or ha ve final r eview of ) all training pr ograms
Oversee the athletic performance operation to ensur e compl iance with
institutional, conf erence, and go verning bodies’ rules and r egulations
Develop and subm it the annual budget and ensur e budgetary compl iance
through ef ficient financial management
Gener ate income and budget available funds for maintenance and
improvement of the f acility
Communicate wi th alumni and stak eholders f or fundraising ini tiatives
Oversee the selection, installation, and maintenance of performance
equipment, including cleaning and r epair
Conduct orientation  meetings for student -athletes on such issues as facility
rules, the value of proper training and nutrition, and the dangers of banned
substances
Develop staff work and supervision schedules, assign duties, and evaluate
performance
Coordinate time schedules for use of the facility by each sport team and
individual student -athletes
Assist wi th on-campus r ecruiting activi ties for prospectiv e student -athletes
Serve on various departmental, institutional, conference, governing body,
and pr ofessional commi ttees and task f orces
Work and communicate wi th coaches in the athletic department
Travel with sport teams (if applicable) and provide remote-si te performance
training programs, including pregame warm-up , cool-down, and recovery
sessions
Maintain a perf ormance tr aining l ibrary for professional dev elopment
Organize continuing  education opportuni ties for strength and condi tioning
staff
Achiev e and maintain professional certifications with continuing education
requirements and a code of ethics, such as the CSCS credential offered
through the NSCA; depending on the professional’ s scope of activities,
responsibi lities, and knowledge requirements, relevant certifications offered
by other go verning bodies ma y also be appr opriate (30)
1784
Perform other duties and special pr ojects as r equested b y supervisor
Perform the duties of the assistant strength and condi tioning professional
and facility supervisor as needed
Adapted f rom Earle (1993) and Epley (1998).
The director is also responsible for developing, presenting, and
enforcing the written policies and procedur es of the staff and
participants in the program. It is the responsibi lity of the director to
ensur e that staff are properly trained and prepared. He or she
achiev es this by having staff and student -athlete orientation
meetings and by periodica lly evaluating the staff’s professional
performance as well as determining and evaluating the attainment of
professional goals. A sample form for the evaluation of student
intern staff members is provided in figure 26.3. This form could be
used to evaluate student interns and adapted to apply more
specifically and effectively to members of the strength and
condi tioning perf ormance team.
Figure 26.3  Student intern evaluation.
Evaluation of staf f member: ____________________________ _
For period:  ______________ _to __________________________ _
The evaluation process is a method of assessing individual performance. It is an
opportuni ty to bring to light any outstanding contributions or deficiencies among
student intern staff members, improve individual job performance, determine
appropriate personnel actions, and stimulate individual dev elopment.
Communication
Has the r espect of the athletes whi le maintaining discipl ine 12345N/A
Teaches pr oper r esistance tr aining ex ercise technique 12345N/A
Has the abi lity to motiv ate athletes and el icit team uni ty 12345N/A
Enforces the weight r oom rules 12345N/A
Exhibi ts courtesy to athletes of both sex es 12345N/A
Does not subject athletes to v erbal or ph ysical abuse 12345N/A
1785
Assumes Responsibility and Leadership
Follows instructions 12345N/A
Is adaptable to new ideas 12345N/A
Is always trying to learn 12345N/A
Does not delegate authori ty without permission 12345N/A
Demonstr ates a high lev el of integri ty 12345N/A
Adjusts tr aining activi ty to fi t skill or age lev el of the athlete 12345N/A
Demonstr ates good judgment 12345N/A
Demonstr ates consistent at tendance and pr omptness 12345N/A
Submi ts paperwork on time as r equested 12345N/A
Possesses the abi lity to get the pr oject done, lar ge or smal l 12345N/A
Submi ts high-qual ity work 12345N/A
Possesses an appr opriate appear ance 12345N/A
Attitude
Functions compatibly wi th all staff, athletes, and other departments 12345N/A
Is trustworth y with sensi tive information 12345N/A
Does not gossip about coaches, athletic tr ainers, or athletes 12345N/A
Strives for objectiv es as stated in department ’s role and mission statement 12345N/A
Key
1 = Signi ficantly below perf ormance expectations
2 = Minimal ly acceptable perf ormance
3 = Meets perf ormance expectations
4 = Ex ceeds perf ormance expectations
5 = Clearly ex ceptional perf ormance
From National Str ength and Condi tioning Association,  Essentials of Str ength
Training and Condi tioning , 5th ed. , edited by G.G. Haf f and N.T . Triplett (Human
Kinetics, 2027). R eprinted b y permission f rom R.W . Earle,  Staff and F acility Policies
and Pr ocedur es Manual  (Creighton Univ ersity, 1993).
1786
Strength and Conditioning Staff (Personal
Qualifications)
The possession of a certification from an independently accredited
organization, such as the Certified Strength and Condi tioning
Special ist (CSCS) certification, establ ishes a standar d of care. On
August 1, 2015, National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA)
Division I adopted legislati on “to specify that a strength and
condi tioning coach shall be certified and maintai n current
certification through a national ly accredited strength and
condi tioning certi fication pr ogram” (27 , p. 1).
Continuing education is a necessary part of maintaining a
professional certification and reducing liability exposur e, especial ly in
the area of supervision and instruction (1). Litigation issues in this
area often involve questions of “professional instructor
qualifications, ” which include continuing education (30). Thus,
assistant strength and condi tioning professionals should also achiev e
and maintain a professional certification including standar d first aid,
cardiopulmonary resusci tation (CPR), and automated external
defibri llation (AED). (See figure 26.4 for points of preparedness
required of each staf f member .)
Figure 26.4  Staff preparedness checklist.
Maintenance of pr ofessional certi fication
Maintenance of certi fication in standar d first aid, CPR, and AED
Review of emer gency r esponse pr ocedur es
Rudimentary first aid pr ocedur es annual ly
Common tr aining f acility injuries and their pr evention
Building ev acuation plan
Knowledge and understanding of pr ogram pol icies and pr ocedur es
Review of r oom capaci ty and saf e supervision r atios
Review of pr eparticipation scr eening and clear ance pr ocedur e
Review of personal and pr ofessional l iability, negl igence, and insur ance
coverage issues
Knowledge and understanding of go verning body rules and r egulations
1787
Review of gener al knowledge of r egulations
Review of rules speci fic to administering the str ength and condi tioning
program
Knowledge and understanding of cleaning and maintenance issues and
needs
Knowledge and understanding of program philosoph y and instruction
methods
Knowledge of tr aining, tr acking, and testing softw are
Technique and dri ll instruction
Body composi tion guidel ines and nutri tional consul tation
Motiv ational issues, such as pushing athletes bey ond ph ysical l imits,
athletes who o vertrain, or athletes who r efuse to f ollow pr ogram
recommendations
Adapted f rom J.H. Taylor, Performance T raining Pr ogram Manual  (New Mexico
State Univ ersity, 2006).
Additional ly, each staff member needs to understand the strength
and conditioning program’s goals and objectiv es, cooper atively work
with others’ responsibi lities and schedules (e.g., the other members
of the sports medicine team), and maintain a professional code of
conduct.
Appendix A of NSCA Strength and Condi tioning Professional
Standar ds and Guidel ines defines the strength and condi tioning
professional:
Certified Strength and Condi tioning Special ists are professionals
who practical ly apply foundational knowledge to assess,
motiv ate, educate, and train athletes for the primary goal of
improving sports performance. They conduct sport-specific
testing sessions, design and implement safe and effective
strength training and conditioning programs, and provide
guidance for athletes in nutrition and injury prevention.
Recognizing their area of expertise is separ ate and distinct
from the medical, dietetic, athletic training, and sport coaching
fields, Certified Strength and Condi tioning Special ists consult
with and refer athletes to these professionals when
appropriate. (30, p . 13)
1788
1789
Legal and Ethical Issues
Everyone involved in athletic activities, including the strength and
condi tioning professional, must be cognizant of legal liability. The
risk of injury cannot be totally eliminated, but it can be effectively
managed by the strength and condi tioning professional. Risk
management  is the emplo yment of strategies to decrease and
control the risk of injury from athletic participation and therefore the
risk of liability exposur e. The first steps in risk managem ent are to
understand integral key terms and identi fy the areas of potential
liability exposur e that could cause injuries and lead to litigation.
Although each facility is unique, recognizable areas of potential
liability are present in all strength and condi tioning facilities. The
following sections discuss these risk areas and the need for an
emergency care plan; reliable record keeping; liability insurance; and
a proactiv e, legal analysis.
Common Legal Terminology
To understand the potential legal ramifications of running a strength
and conditioning facility, the strength and condi tioning professional
must first understand the f ollowing common legal terms.
Informed consent —The process by which a procedur e or
activity is described to a participant, with an explanation of the
inherent risks and benefi ts involved, allowing the individual to
determine whether he or she desir es to participate.
Liability —A legal responsibi lity, duty, or obligation. Strength
and conditioning professionals have a duty to the athletes they
serve by virtue of their emplo yment not only to act when an
injury oc curs but also to pr event injury (5).
Standard of care—What a reasonable and prudent person
would do under similar circumstances. A strength and
condi tioning professional is expected to act according to his or
her education, level of training, and certification status (e.g.,
1790
CSCS, National Strength and Condi tioning Association Certified
Personal Trainer [NSCA -CPT], Emergency Medical Technician
[EMT], CPR, AED , first aid).
Negligence —Failure to act as a reasonable and prudent
person would under similar circumstances. Four elements
must exist for a strength and condi tioning professional to be
found negligent: duty, breach of duty, proximate cause,
and damages  (30). The strength and condi tioning
professional must be found to have had a duty to act and to
have failed to act (a breach)  with the appropriate standar d of
care, resulting in damages (physical or economic injury) to
another perso n because of the natural and continuous
sequence of reasonably foreseeable events (proximate cause).
For example, a strength and condi tioning professional sees
that a cable is excessiv ely worn on a resistance training
machine and notes it, but does not post an “Out of Order”
sign. An athlete uses the machine and incurs an injury . In this
case, the strength and condi tioning professional could be
found negligent: His or her duty was to fix the cable or post a
sign, but he or she failed to act, and an athlete sustained an
injury because of the potential ly injurious situation of a cable
that w as ready to br eak.
Assumption of risk—Knowing that an inherent risk exists
with participation in an activity and voluntari ly deciding to
participate anyway (19). All athletic activities, including
strength and condi tioning, involve a certain level of risk;
athletes must be thoroughly  informed of the risk and should
sign a stateme nt to that effect. It should be noted that an
assumption of risk waiver may not provide protection from
legal liability if the strength and condi tioning professional is
found to be negligent when damage is incurr ed by an athlete
while participating in str ength and condi tioning activi ties.
1791
Common Litigation Issues
Litigation issues commonly encounter ed in the strength and
condi tioning profession include, but are not limited to, negligence,
negligent hiring, claims regarding products liability, the Equal
Protection Clause of the 14th Amendment, Title VI of the Civil Rights
Act of 1964, Title IX of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, the
Rehabi litation Act, the Americans With Disabi lities Act, and
intentional infl iction of emotional distr ess.
Negligence is a tort, which is defined as a civil wrong (10). Civil
law relates to private rights and remedies that are sought by action
or suit as distinct from criminal proceedings (11). The burden of
proof for the elements of negligence (i.e., duty, breach, causation,
damages) in a civil case is the preponder ance of the evidence, which
is simply the greater weight of the evidence (12). In order to prevail
on a negligence claim, each element of negligence must be proven
by a preponde rance of the evidence. A claim for negligence normal ly
alleges a claim for damages. Damages are defined as money claimed
by, or ordered to be paid to, a person as compensation for loss or
injury (13). Recently , a substantial number of legal actions were
initiated as the result of damages incurr ed by athletes due to the
implementation of invalid strength and condi tioning programs that
were not backed by scienti fic evidence or resear ch. The
implementation of strength and condi tioning programs that do not
have evidence-based foundations can result in athlete s suffering
from exertional rhabdom yolysis, which can involve permanent kidney
damage. The foregoing allegation was filed on January 9, 2019, in a
complaint for negligence and heard in a court of law in the Circuit
Court of the state of Oregon when a former student -athlete filed a
claim alleging that “non-evidence based physical punishment
regimens” contributed to a permanent renal injury to the student -
athlete (23).
Another significant cause of allegations of negligence is due to the
failure to properly train an athlete who has been diagnosed with a
medical condi tion, where it is foreseeable that injury or death could
1792
result if the intensi ty of the exercise prescription is not modified and
controlled. An example of negligence after a diagnosis of a medical
condi tion is when a strength and condi tioning profession al knew or
should have known that a student -athlete had been diagnosed with
sickle cell trait but did not take proactiv e measur es to ensur e that
the athlete was placed in a condi tioning setting with the proper
work-to-rest ratio to target the health condi tion that was separ ate
from the athletes without a previous sickle cell trait diagnosis. As a
result of the failure to modify the work-to-rest ratio of the athlete
with sickle cell trait and by requiring the athlete to train under the
same work-to-rest ratio guide lines as the athletes without any sickle
cell trait diagnosis, the athlete with sickle cell trait suffered either
significant organ damage or died as a result of performing a
condi tioning workout. The strength and condi tioning professional’ s
duty was to train the athlete , who had been diagnosed with sickle
cell trait, within the parameters that ensur ed the health and safety
of the athlete with sickle cell trait, and the failure to do so caused
the injury or death of the athlete. In this example, the strength and
condi tioning professional did not act with the required standar d of
care and proximately caused a foreseeable damage or injury;
therefore, the actions of the strength and condi tioning professional
coupled with the failure to act (i.e., modifying the work-to-rest ratio
of an athlete with sickle cell trait) were negligent. The foregoing
issue of negligence was litigated in a court of law where a jury found
the responden t entity liable and awarded damages to the petitioner
(24). Even though the issues of negligence can be decide d in a trial
by jury, some cases reach a settlement agreement before being
litigated in a court of law, and some actions are dismissed by a
presiding judge through summary judgment. Summary judgment is
a judgm ent granted on a claim about which there is no genuine
issue of material fact and on which the movant is entitled to prevail
as a mat ter of la w (14).
In some actions, state defendants can avoid liability due to
sovereign immuni ty, which is defined both as a government ’s
1793
immuni ty from being sued in its own courts without its consent and
a state’s immuni ty from being sued in federal court by the state’ s
own citizens (15). A motion for summary judgment was granted in a
case decided in the United States District Court for the Northern
District of Mississippi Oxford Division that ruled on federal and state
claims initiated  against a state university and an emplo yee (i.e.,
head footbal l coach) in both the emplo yee’s official capaci ty (i.e.,
Title VI, Title IX, Americans With Disabi lities Act, Rehabi litation Act,
and state claims of gross negligence and negligence ) and the
emplo yee’s individual capaci ty (i.e., federal equal protection claim
and state intentional infliction of emotional distress claim) (25).
Summary judgments can be dismissed with prejudice, which means
a dismis sal barring the plainti ff from prosecuting any later lawsuit on
the same claim, or without prejudice, which does not bar the plainti ff
from refiling the lawsuit within the applicable limitations period (16).
Case law and litigation directs the strength and condi tioning
professional to consistently demonstr ate a standar d of care that
implements a strength and condi tioning program that is evidence
based and supported by research to avoid an athlete incurring organ
damage f rom ex ertional rhabdom yolysis.
The strength and condi tioning professional shall take health-
related information provided by medical evaluatio ns while
maintaining compl iance with any Health Insurance Portability and
Accountabi lity Act (HIPAA) guidel ines to ensur e that athletes with
significant medical condi tions (e.g., sickle cell trait, prior heat-related
issue, asthma) are prescribed  the proper work-to-rest ratios. Title VI
and Title IX of the Civil Rights of 1964 have been at the forefront of
many claims alleging racial discrimination and sexual discrimination,
respectiv ely. It is essential that the implementation of the overall
strength and condi tioning program and the benefi ts provided to each
team are equal and do not discriminate on the basis of sex. For
example, it is imper ative that workout times, program designs,
equipment availability, technological assessments, evaluations (i.e.,
strength, powe r, body composi tion), and nutritional supplements be
1794
provided to women’ s sports on an equal basis as given to men’s
sports.
Preparticipation Screening and Medical
Clearance
Before an athlete is allowed access to the strength and conditioning
facility, preparticipation screening and clearance in accordance with
relevant governing bodies (e.g., NCAA, institution sports medicine
staff, and high school athletic associations) are required. This
requirement is establ ished under Section 1 of NSCA Strength and
Condi tioning Professional Standards and Guidel ines (30). Standar d
1.1 “requires participants to under go health care provider screening
and clearance before participation. ” The strength and conditioning
professional does not need an actual copy of the physical
examination but should require a signed statement to show proof of
medical clearance to participate. Athletes who are returning from an
injury or illness or who have special needs (e.g., diabetes, asthma,
epilepsy, hypertension) should also be required to show proof of
medical clearance before beginning or returning to a strength and
condi tioning pr ogram.
Procedur es should therefore be in place to ensur e that
documentation confirming that each athlete was screened and
cleared to participate by the sports medicine staff is on record in the
main office of the strength and condi tioning program before athletes
are allowed to participate. Note, howev er, that it is the responsibi lity
of the sports medicine staff (e.g., the team or program’s certified
athletic trainer, physician, or physical therapist) to allow an athlete to
begin formal involvement in the strength and condi tioning program.
In the case of a school location, this applies to both athletes who are
new to the school or program and athletes who are just recovering
from an injury or illness. This stipulation is important because it is
not in the strength and condi tioning professional’ s scope of
practice  (i.e., proper legal parameters and professional duties) to
diagnose or evaluate an individual’ s medical or health condi tion.
1795
Therefore, only the sports medicine staff can provide medical
clearance (and proof thereof) and answer any questions about
participation. The strength and condi tioning professional should
collaborate with the medical staff and sports medicine personnel so
that workouts can be modified (e.g., work-to-rest ratio) to ensur e
the health and safety of any athlete diagnosed with a medical
condi tion or disease (e.g., sickle cell trait, prior heat-related issue,
asthma).
Eligibility Criteria
To focus the attention and efforts of the strength and condi tioning
staff on a target training population, certain eligibility requirements
should be establ ished. The following is a list of typical individuals or
groups who are allowed to use the strength and condi tioning facility
at an insti tution:
Full- or part-time student -athletes participating in an athletic
department –sponsor ed sport
Newly incomin g and just-transferred student -athletes who
have register ed for school and have confirmation of team
status as designated b y the head sport coach
Students in ph ysical education classes
All athletic department coaching and administr ative staf f
All sports medicine department staf f
Alumni athlete s who participated in an athletic departm ent–
sponsor ed sport and completed their el igibility
Individuals and groups approved by the athletic director or
director of str ength and condi tioning
Other individuals or groups may request access to the strength
and condi tioning facility. These persons or groups must receive prior
approval by the athletic director or director of strength and
condi tioning and should have a prearranged schedule that specifies
when they will use the facility so proper supervision can be provided.
To be consistent and objectiv e, it is advantageous to have a policy in
1796
place to refer to rather than having to decide on this on a case-b y-
case basis. This policy is especial ly important as it relates to the
facility fee, if any. The following are examples of common criteria by
which to determine whether outside organizations can use a
strength and condi tioning f acility:
Use must be pr eappr oved by the athletic dir ector.
Use must be preappr oved by the strength and condi tioning
director.
The program or session must be supervised by strength and
condi tioning department staf f.
The program or session must be scheduled during off-hours
when athletes ar e not pr esent.
The individual or organization must supply written proof of
additional l iability insur ance.
All participants must sign a release agreement form. Figure
26.5 shows a samp le release of liability form. Check any such
form for compl iance with current local and national laws
before using it. Reducing liability for on-pr emises injuries
during use of the facility is critical in any risk management
strategy .
All participants must follow the rules and regulations of the
strength and condi tioning f acility.
The athletic director and the strength and condi tioning director
have the right to limit an individual’ s or group’s access, if
warranted.
Figure 26.5  Sample release agreement form for
facility use by an outside individual or group.
(School Name)
Release Agreement
I, the undersigned,  do hereby acknow ledge and understand that I will be using
the (school name)  strength and condi tioning f acility.
1797
I further acknowledge that I have been advised of the risks involved in the use of
the strength and conditioning facility and its equipment, and I further acknow ledge
that I have been warned that my use of the strength and condi tioning facility and
its equipment could r esult in injury or harm to m yself.
I acknowledge and assume any such risk to my person should I use the strength
and condi tioning f acility and i ts equipment.
In the event that I should sustain injury to myself as a result of my use of the
strength and condi tioning facility and its equipment, I hereby agree to hold
harmless the (school name)  , the coaches, athletic trainers, super visors, or any
other emplo yees.
I have read and fully understand the contents of this “hold harmless” agreement
and ex ecute same as m y own v oluntary act.
I agree to modify my workout to conform to the recommendations of the (school
name)  strength and condi tioning staff if asked to do so, and I agree to leave the
strength and condi tioning facility if asked to do so by a member of the (school
name)  strength and condi tioning staf f.
Signatur e: ____________________________ _
Date: ____________________________ _
Name (printed): ____________________________ _
Adapted f rom Earle (1993) and Epley (1998).
Record Keeping
Documentation is fundamental to the effective management of a
strength and condi tioning facility. Secure records should be kept on
file of cleaning  and maintenance, safety procedur es, manufacturer’s
warranties and guidel ines, assumption-of -risk or other informed
consent forms, medical waivers and clearance forms, personnel
credentials, professional guidelines and recommendations (e.g., use
of weight belts and resistance training techniques), and injury report
forms (30). Injury report forms should be maintained as long as
possible in case an injury suit is filed. The time during which
individuals can file a lawsuit (i.e., the statute of limitations ) varies
(from state to state in the United States as well as throughout the
world), so it is a good practice to maintain files indefini tely or to
check wi th a legal authori ty (20).
1798
Liability Insurance
Because of the potential for injury in athletic participation, it is
essential for strength and condi tioning staff members to purchase
professional liability insurance, especial ly if they are not covered
under the facility policy. Liability insurance is a contractual promise
by which the insurer promises to defend and indemni fy the insured,
up to the defined limits of liability, from certain defined liability risks
at the insurer’s cost in exchange for payment of a premium.
Strength and condi tioning professionals should consul t their human
resour ce manager, legal consul tant, or professional organization
(e.g., NSCA) f or further inf ormation.
Insurance is a contractual promise by which the insurer
promises to defend and indemnify the insured, up to the
defined limits of liability, from certain defined liability
risks at the insurer’s cost in exchange for payment of a
premium.
Product Liability
Product liability  refers to the legal responsi bilities of those who
manuf acture or sell products  if a person sustains injury or damage
as a result of using the product (1). Although strength and
condi tioning professionals may not manuf acture or sell a product,
they can be named as codefendants in product liability suits.
Therefore, it is important for strength and condi tioning professionals
to understand the concept of product liability and actions that could
place them at risk for litigation. Although product liability applies
only to those who are in the business of manuf acturing or selling
products, there are behaviors that can void liability of the
manuf acturer or seller and place responsibi lity in the hands of the
strength and condi tioning professional. Two key consider ations that
determine whether the manuf acturer or seller is liable are whether
the product has been changed from the condi tion in which it was
1799
original ly sold and whether the product is used as intended by the
manuf acturer (5). To avoid injury to athletes caused by strength and
condi tioning equipment, the f ollowing steps should be tak en:
Use equipment only for the purpose intended by the
manuf acturer. Refer to the manuf acturer’s instructional
materials that accompan y the equipment, including user age
and siz e speci fications.
Be certain that equipmen t meets existing professional
standar ds and guidel ines. Do not purchase and use equipment
that has been deemed unsaf e or ineffective by professional
organizations and experts. Be aware of equipment recalls, and
return such equipment to the manuf acturer immediately .
Buy only from reputable manuf acturers. Strength and
condi tioning professionals must do their homework to check
on the safety record of a manufacturer or seller and any claims
that may have been filed against that manuf acturer or seller.
Organizations such as the Better Business Bureau in the
United States, other strength  and condi tioning colleagues,  and
professional organizations are good resour ces for this
information.
Do not modify equipment unless such adaptations are clearly
designated and instructions for doing so are included in the
product information. Some equipment is designed to be
modified for specific needs, such as fitting, but directions for
modifying the pr oduct must be f ollowed exactly .
Apply all warning labels that accompan y a new equipment
purchase. If such labels are not placed on the machine in plain
view and an individual is injured (and the injury relates to
what the warning label addresses), the strength and
condi tioning pr ofessional can be held l iable.
Continual ly inspect equipment for damage and wear that may
place an athlete at risk for injury . To recogniz e potential
problems, the strength and condi tioning professional must
understand the purpose, capabi lities, and limitations of
1800
equipment and how equip ment can cause injury . Always
inspect newly purchased equipment before use. If new
equipment arrives damaged, immediately notify the
manuf acturer or seller and have it replaced. If currently owned
equipment becomes damaged, remove it for repair or
replacement. If equipment is too large to remove or no
storage space exists, affix a sign to the equipment stating that
it should not be used.
Do not allow unsupervise d athletes to use equipment.
Constant supervision of the athletes by the strength and
condi tioning professional ensur es that equipment is used for
its intended purpose and wi th proper technique (30).
Discipline
To ensure that athletes adher e to the facility rules, the strength and
condi tioning director may want to require them to sign and date a
copy of the facility rules and guidel ines to acknowledge that they
understand and will adher e to all rules before facility use. This
process will reduce the possibility of claims that they did not know
the repercussio ns of aberrant behavior. The facility rules need to be
enforced, with possible discipl inary actions posted, docum ented, and
levied in proportion to the offense. The use of exercise and
condi tioning activities as punishment is strictly prohibited due to the
negativ e, legal consequences that will result from reckless or
negligent conduct (e.g., hazing and mental abuse). According to The
Inter-Association Task Force for Preventing Sudden Death in
Collegiate Conditioning Sessions best practice recommend ations, “no
additional physical burden that would increase the physical risk of
injury or sudden death should be placed on the athlete under any
circumstance” (6, p. 478). Following is an example of a tiered
penal ty system applied to a repeated violation (7). (Note that this
type of policy must be establ ished with full support and involvement
of the athletic director and all sport coaches. Typical ly, the strength
and conditioning staff does not have to pursue discipl inary actions
1801
past the first or second offense, because most sport coach es want to
handle such a si tuation. )
First offense. A verbal warning by a staff member , an
explanation of the nature and importance of the rule or
guidel ine that was broken, and a reminder of the discipl inary
action that wi ll result from a second of fense.
Second offense. Dismissal from the facility for one day,
documentation of the offense by the staff member,
correspondence with the athlete’ s sport coach, and a reminder
of the discipl inary action that wi ll result from a thir d offense.
Third offense. Dismissal from the facility for one week,
documentation of the offense by the staff member,
correspondence with the athlete’ s sport coach, and a reminder
of the discipl inary action that wi ll result from a f ourth of fense.
Fourth offense. Dismissal from the facility for the remainder of
the year, documentation of the offense by the staff member,
correspondence with the athlete’ s sport coach and the athletic
director, and a reminder of the discipl inary action that will
result from a fi fth of fense.
Fifth offense. Permanent dismissal from the facility,
documentation of the offense by the staff member , and
correspondence with the athlete’ s sport coach and the athletic
director.
Supplements, Ergogenic Aids, and Banned
Substances
Strength and condi tioning professionals are commonly approached
for nutrition and supplement advice. The strength and condi tioning
professional is expected to uphold the NSCA Code of Ethics.
Standar d 9.1 in NSCA Strength and Condi tioning Professional
Standar ds and Guidel ines states:
Strength and Condi tioning professionals must not prescribe,
recommend or provide drugs, controlled substances or
1802
supplements that are illegal, prohibited or harmf ul to
participants for any purpo se including enhancing athletic
performance, conditioning or physique. Only those substances
that are lawful and have been scienti fically proven to be
beneficial, or at least not harmf ul, may be recommended or
provided to participants by Strength and Condi tioning
professionals, and only to individuals age 18 or above. (Note:
See appl icable state la w for age r ange v ariations. ) (30)
Rules and regulations may differ between various sport governing
bodies (e.g., NCAA, United States Olympic Commi ttee, Major League
Basebal l, National Basketball Association, National Footba ll League,
National Hockey League). It is the responsibi lity of the strength and
condi tioning professional to stay up to date and seek out the related
rules and regulations, as well as the scienti fic evidence that supports
or refutes the efficacy of nutritional supplements. It is recommended
that strength and condi tioning professionals consul t with a sports
nutritionist or dieti tian on mat ters regarding nutri tional supplements.
1803
Staff Policies and Activities
Discussed here are various policies typical ly establ ished and activities
typical ly observ ed in a strength and condi tioning facility. This
information is provided for reference only; each strength and
condi tioning facility is unique and may have certain characteristics
that dictate the speci fic appl ication of these pol icies and activi ties.
Orientation Meeting
Typical ly, at the beginning of the school year or sport season, an
orientation meeting is held for the athletes and sport coaches before
their first use of the strength and condi tioning facility. At this
meeting the director provides the phone numbers of the facility and
staff and explains the servic es of the staff (goals, objectives, and
mission of the program), hours of operation including team training
schedule, facility rules and regulations including discipl inary actions,
and emergency procedur es. Preparticipation and eligibility
requirements should be explained. A strength training orientation
should cover proper equipment use including spotting techniques
when appropriate, correct exercise execution, and common risks
associated with incorr ect or inattentiv e exercise technique or
spotting.
Reporting and Documentation
As discussed earlier, proper documentation and record keeping are
essential to the management and monitoring of strength and
condi tioning programs and facilities. In cases of emergency or
incidents of injury , it is important to establ ish a chain of command
for risk management. This may include coaches, the director of
strength and condi tioning, sports medicine personnel, and the
athletic director. Significant efforts should be made to protect the
privacy and confidential ity of participants. In compl iance with federal
regulatory laws such as the HIPAA, a participant ’s health care
information may not be released without written authorization; this
1804
includes injury reports provided by the sports medicine staff. An
incident –injury report form should be completed and kept on file
when an injury has oc curred (30).
Additional records that should be developed and maintained and
that are crucial to the operation of the strength and condi tioning
programs and f acilities include the f ollowing (30):
Personnel cr edentials
Professional standar ds and guidel ines
Policies and procedur es for operation and safety (written
emergency plan)
Equipment user manuals provided by the manuf acturer
(warranties, oper ating guidel ines, instal lation, setup)
Equipment and facility maintenance (inspection, maintena nce,
cleaning, and r epair)
Preparticipation medical clear ance
Return-to-participation clear ance
Protectiv e legal documents such as informed consent, waiver
of claim, personal contr act
Training logs, ev aluation entries, instruction notes
Participants should complete and sign such legal documents at the
annual orientation meeting.
Code of Ethics and Professionalism
A code of ethics comprises the standar ds and principles for which
the profession al will be held accountable. Most professional
organizations have codes of ethics or codes of conduct that
members must agree to adher e to and apply in their professional
practices (28). These codes are intended to establ ish professional ism
and high standar ds of ethical behavior while protecting  the rights
and dignity of individuals. Strength and condi tioning professionals
should become familiar with the NSCA Code of Ethics as well as their
institution’ s code of ethics and student -athlete code of conduct if
applicable. Athlete welfare is gener ally the primary focus. Bullying,
1805
hazing, and social media guidel ines may also be addressed.
Additional ly, consider designating specific policies for appearance or
dress code, telephone use, personal workouts, and personal use of
compan y equipment, as well as standar ds for the coach– athlete,
coach–intern, and coach–sport coach relationships and athlete
conduct in the weight room (4, 29). These written principles are
intended to enhance the strength and condi tioning program’s
effectiveness whi le promoting high standar ds of integri ty.
Instruction and Supervision
A qualified strength and condi tioning professional must properly
instruct athletes in safe and effective strength and condi tioning
techniques. Instruction involves teaching an athlete a skill in a safe
manner and correcting the athlete if necessary . Emphasizing safety
and proper technique for resistance training rather than the amount
of weight lifted helps reduce  the incidence of injury and therefore
liability exposure. Instructional methods, procedur es, and
progressions that are consis tent with professional guidelines and
standar ds should be used (5).
Furthermor e, direct supervision is required to achiev e maximum
performance, safety, and instruction. Staff members should have the
ability to clearly communica te and view both the athlete and the
zone being supervised (if not the entire facility). Spotting, in
conjunction with the use of appropriate safety equipment , is critical
(30). Staff should effectively communicate with the athlete to ensur e
safe, proper, and effective spotting when athletes are performing
exercises in which free weights are sustained on the trunk or moved
over the face and head. Principles of supervision include the
following (5):
Always be ther e.
Be activ e and hands on.
Be prudent, car eful, and pr epared.
Be qual ified.
Be vigi lant.
1806
Inform participants of saf ety and emer gency pr ocedur es.
Know participants’ heal th status.
Monitor and enf orce rules and r egulations.
Monitor and scrutiniz e the en vironment.
Guidel ine 3.1 in NSCA Strength and Condi tioning Professional
Standar ds and Guidel ines states the f ollowing:
Strength and Condi tioning activities should be planned, and the
requisi te number of qualified staff should be available such that
recommended guidel ines for minimum average floor space
allowed per participant (100 ft2), professional-to-participant
ratios (1:10 junior high school, 1:15 high school, 1:20 college),
and number of participants per barbel l or training station are
achiev ed during peak usage times. (30, p . 10)
The foregoing guidel ines should be modified for increased levels
of supervision if the exercises being implemented involve complex
movements.
Supervision was cited in an estimated 80% of court cases in
which athletic  injuries occurred (5). Inadequate instruction or
supervision is often a main cause. All athletes should be constantly
supervised, which requires the physical presence of a qualified
strength and condi tioning professional for overseeing all activities
(20, 21, 26). To provide proper supervision, supervisor stations need
to be located where a clear view of the facility and athletes is
possible (30). Suggested staff-to-athlete ratios should  also be
adher ed to, but these can vary depending on the type of training.
For instance, if a group of athletes is performing a machine circuit
training workout, they do not need as much supervision as athletes
who are lifting with free weights. Also, athletes with a low training
age need more supervision than athletes who are experienced in the
weight r oom.
Regarding the influence of supervision on performance, strength
gains are greater in subjects training under lower supervision ratios
(18). Emplo yers and practitioners must understand the importance
1807
of staffing for safety and performance gains and, in instances in
which optimal ratios are not possible for various reasons, continual ly
work toward a goal of meeting appropriate ratios as soon as is
practical.
Strength and condi tioning professionals are commonly
approached to attend team practices and competi tions as well as to
travel with the sport teams. They should be encour aged to attend as
long as this does not adversely affect the facility’s coach -to-athlete
ratio.
The risk of injury cannot be totally eliminated but can be
effectively managed by the strength and conditi oning
professional.
Program Design
An effective strength and condi tioning program should be based on
scienti fic principles to enhance performance and increase injury
resistance with intended outcomes specific to the sport (6). Program
intensi ties should be within NSCA standar ds and guidel ines. Please
refer to chapters 14 to 21 and the NSCA ’s various position papers as
resour ces for strength and condi tioning training plan development.
The director of strength and condi tioning should oversee and
monitor all performance training programs, including reconditioning.
A copy of all programs designed by staff (i.e., the list of exercises to
be performed) should be reviewed and on file in the director’s office
before a team begins their pr ogram (29).
Training Sheet (Training Card)
The process of gener ating a training sheet or card is different for
each strength and condi tionin g program. The use of online softw are
has also allowed strength and condi tioning professionals to design
training programs that can be delivered electr onical ly through apps
on a tablet or mobile device. It is up to the strength and
condi tioning professional to determine which mode of delivery
1808
(paper or paperless) is most effective and efficient for the team and
space and consider the strength of the Wi-Fi network and Bluetooth
connectivi ty before implementing paperless programmin g. Training
sessions should be prearranged, and therefore athletes must have
an approved training sheet when training. Additional sessions should
be approved by the overseeing strength and conditioning
professional to ensur e proper intensi ty and volume-load monitoring.
Strength and condi tioning staff members must be familiar with every
exercise on each athlete’ s training sheet and should not advise an
athlete to perform other exercises unless stipulated by the director
or the sports medicine staff, which should be commi tted to writing
as soon as possible after the session. For each exercise that is
included on the sport teams’ training sheets, including plyometric,
agility, and speed development drills, the director needs to inform
the staff regarding how the exercise technique should be taught to
athletes and also provide demonstr ations and instruction. For
additional supervision, strength and condi tioning professionals may
consider requiring the athletes’ last set of foundational exercises to
be seen by a staff member and check ed off for proper execution.
Establ ishing consistent verbiage across performance training
programs is r ecommended.
1809
Facility Administration
Strength and condi tioning facility rules and guidel ines are important
for providing guidance on conduct and behavior, establ ishing order,
and keeping the program on course toward the goal of providing a
safe, clean, and professional training environment. Refer to figure
26.6 for a list of common facility rules and guidel ines. These should
be posted in the f acility wher e they can be easi ly seen.
Understand that the strength and condi tioning facility is unique
and that it may have certain characteristics that dictate the specific
application of policies and activities. Equipment available and size of
the facility or team can present a logistical challenge for schedul ing
and developing hours of operation. One should consider what
training format will affect the greatest number of athletes when
making schedul ing decisions. Particularly for small colleges or high
schools, the goal is to organize the strength and conditioning
program so as to allow the practitioner to work with the maximum
number of athletes based on the equipment and time available while
under a proper supervision ratio. In any case, the priority of a team’ s
training time depends on the season they are in. In-sea son teams
typical ly have priority over off-season teams, because often the
training schedule revolves around the practice and game schedule.
Off-season teams may have to compr omise and train early in the
morning i f the f acility cannot ac commodate mul tiple teams at a time.
One potential solution is adopting a Monda y-Wednesda y-Frida y
format for off-season teams, which opens the facility to be used by
in-season teams on Tuesda y and Thursda y. If Friday competi tions
interfere with this organization, a second scenario is schedul ing
some of the off-season teams on Monda y-Tuesda y-Thursda y and
some on Tuesday-Thursda y-Frida y. This will allow the facility to be
used by in-season teams on Monda y and Wednesda y. Consider
schedul ing off-season teams during typical afternoon practice times.
In-season teams can be scheduled early or late to reduce
overcrowding in the f acility (3).
1810
For opening and closing procedur es, policies are typical ly based
on the daily operations, inspection, and cleaning of the strength and
condi tioning facility. Additional ly, consider designatin g specific
operating procedur es for holidays or for the institution’ s academic
calendar , stereo or music use, office hours, storage, and staff locker
room activities. Again, these written principles are intended to
enhance facility efficiency while promoting program effectiveness
(30).
Figure 26.6  Facility rules and guidelines.
Before participation, athletes must go through a preparticipation screening
and clear ance pr ocedur e (5).
Before participation , all athletes must attend an orientation on common risks
involved in resistance training, the proper execution of various exercises,
and the possible consequences i f proper technique is not used.
Athletes must have a training program, follow it, and record training
contents.
If an athlete has an injury that inhibi ts a portion of the training program, the
athlete must receive a modified program from the sports medicine
department that describes which exercises should be avoided and which
ones ma y be substi tuted.
Athletes ar e required to use locks on the ends of al l barbel ls.
No one should squat outside the squat or power r ack.
Bumper plates ar e required on the platf orms f or all power ex ercises.
Athletes must not wear weight belts when the belts could contact equipment
upholstery .
Athletes should move weights from the racks to the bar only. They should
never set plates on the floor or lean them against equipment or walls.
Athletes should return dumbbel ls to the rack in the proper order. Athletes
should not dr op or thr ow weights or dumbbel ls.
Athletes should show respect for equipment and facilities at all times;
spitting in or defacing the facility is not tolerated and will result in immediate
expulsion.
The weight room requires concentr ation. Horsepla y, loud or offensive
language, or temper tantrums ar e not permi tted.
The staff offices and telephones are off limits to athletes unless permission
to use them is giv en.
1811
Athletes should wear proper training attire, particularly shirts and athletic
shoes, at al l times.
Athletes should use spotters for exercises that place the bar on the back or
front shoulders and exercises that involve a bar or dumbbel ls moving over
the face or abo ve the head. P ower ex ercises ar e not spot ted.
Athletes should immediately report any facility-related injury or facility or
equipment irr egulari ty to the supervisor on dut y.
Tobacco, food, chewing gum, glass bottles, cans, alcohol, drugs, and banned
substances are not allowed in the strength and condi tioning facility; plastic
water bot tles ar e acceptable.
Supervisors are not responsible for users’ personal belongings or lost or
stolen i tems.
Jewelry such as loose necklaces, bracelets, hanging earrings, and watches
should not be worn.
Athletes should k eep feet of f the w alls.
Athletes should minimiz e chalk and powder on the floor .
All guests and visi tors must r eport to the of fice to sign the w aiver form.
Former athletes must have their programs preappr oved by a staff supervisor
and must sign a w aiver form.
Athletic department personnel can use these facilities for personal training
sessions i f they do not interf ere with the needs of the athletes.
Non–athletic department personnel are allowed to use the facilities with
permission of the athletic director after signing a waiver form. Recogniz ed
users may include athletes, students, guests, staff, faculty with permission,
former athletes, f amily members, and visi ting teams.
Equipment leaving the weight room shall be check ed out by the supervisor
and recorded at the supervisor ’s desk.
The on-dut y supervisors have authori ty over all weight room conduct and
use of equipment and may expel an athlete from the facility for failure to
follow instructions.
Adapted f rom Earle (1993); Epley , Flight Manual  (1998); Epley , Make the Pla y
(1998).
1812
Emergency Planning and Response
Providing a standar d of care is a shared responsibi lity including, but
not limited to, medical personnel, sport coaches, strength and
condi tioning professionals, administr ators, and the institution. Life
safety is always the first priority when an emergency occurs. Keep in
mind that an emergency , including athletic injuries, can occur
anytime and anywher e during activity. Having a written response
plan for environmental situations as well as life-threatening and
non–l ife-threatening situatio ns provides a guidel ine for proper
procedur es to be followed and practiced in case of an emergency .
This emergency action plan is a written document that details the
proper procedures for caring for injuries. All personnel in the
strength and condi tioning facility must know the emergency action
plan and the pr oper pr ocedur es for deal ing wi th emer gencies.
Components of an Emergency Action Plan
The following are the typical items included or described in an
emergency plan:
EMS (emer gency medical services) activ ation pr ocedur es
Names and telephone numbers of primary , secondary , and
tertiary individuals to contact
Specific address of the strength and condi tioning facility (to
give directions to EMS)
Locations of the telephones
Locations of near est exi ts
Designated personnel qualified to care for injuries (i.e., sports
medicine staf f)
Ambulance ac cess
Location of emer gency suppl ies, first aid ki t, and AED
Plan of action in case of fire, tornado , life-threatening injury ,
crime, terr orism, and so f orth
1813
In addition to posting the emergency care plan in a clearly visible
location, it is critical that all strength and condi tioning professionals
maintain current first aid and CPR certification and practice the
emergency action plan at least quarterly .
Emergency Personnel
Working collaboratively, establ ish a plan that allows for and
determines the need for appropriate medical coverage to be in
place. The emergency plan should include immediate access to or
planned access to a physician for assessment of the circumstance in
a timely manner . As a potential first responder , the strength and
condi tioning professional and any personnel associated with
practices, skill instruction, and strength and condi tioning should
acquir e and maintain a professional certification including standar d
first aid, CPR, and AED (6, 30).
Emergency Communication
Establ ish a direct line of communication and formulate  a backup
plan. Immediate communication is crucial to quick delivery of
emergency care. Access to a telephone (land line or cellular) is a
viable option if medical personnel are not on site. Ensur e that
participants in the strength and condi tioning program and the
overseeing supervisors know the location of the closest workable
telephone, whether i t is inside or outside (6, 30).
Emergency Equipment
Emergency equipment should be readily available in an emergency
situation. Maintaining professional certifications for standar d first aid,
CPR, and AED means that personnel have been trained in advance
on proper use. First responders should periodical ly rehearse.
Additional ly, emergency information for participants should be
readily available f or access b y medical personnel (30).
1814
Roles Within the Emergency Team
It is recommended that professionals develop an emergency plan
specific to their own setting. Figure 26.7 shows an example of an
emergency procedur es plan. An emergency plan should list
strategies for handl ing emergency situations and provide names,
titles, and telephone numbers of important individuals to contact as
part of the emergency team. Each individual may have a different
role, but understanding the roles allows the emergency team to
function ef fectively.
Within the emergency team, four principal roles exist. The first is
to provide immediate care of the athletes, because time is the most
critical factor in emergency situations. The second  involves
emergency equipment retriev al; users of the facility should be made
aware of the types and locations of emergency equipment before
participation. Next is the activation of the emergency medical system
(EMS). Again, establ ish a method for a direct line of communication
in cases in which emergency transportation is not already on site.
Finally, the individual making the call should have been familiarized
with the facility location during the orientation meeting. This will
make it easier to direct EMS to the scene. Establ ish a cleared route
and a direct line for transpor tation for quick entering and exiting of
the facility.
Figure 26.7  Sample emergency procedures
protocol.
Fire
Step 1: Activ ate fir e alarm.
Step 2: Ev acuate the bui lding.
Life-Threatening Situations
Step 1: Cal l 911.*
Step 2: Do not mo ve the victim.
Step 3: If the victim is conscious, ask permission to administer first aid.
1815
Step 4: Administer CPR or AED i f necessary .
Step 5: Sta y with the victim unti l help arriv es.
Step 6: Activate the emergency communication plan to notify appropriate
parties.
Step 7: Document the incident on an injury r eport.
Environmental Situations
Step 1: Activate the appropriate alarm and get everyone directed to a
predetermined saf e location.
Step 2: Cal l 911* f or medical help i f necessary .
Step 3: Ac count f or all parties and noti fy rescue personnel.
Step 4: Activate the emergency communication plan to notify appropriate
parties.
Step 5: Document the incident on an injury r eport.
Non-Life-Threatening Situations
Step 1: Pr ovide first aid.
Step 2: Cal l 911* f or medical help i f necessary .
Step 3: Activate the emergency communication plan to notify appropriate
parties.
Step 4: Document the incident on an injury r eport.
*Or a compar able local emer gency r esponse pr ovider. Note that some phone
communication systems ma y require alternativ e dial ing.
Adapted b y permission f rom NSCA,  NSCA P erformance Center Emer gency P olicies
and Pr ocedur es (NSCA, 2011).
1816
Conclusion
Program goals give a strength and condi tioning program direction
and purpose, and program objectiv es help keep the program on task
by providing steps toward these goals. Based on these goals and
objectiv es, policies and procedur es are developed to guide
participant and staff conduct and to ensur e a safe training
environment. If appropriate documentation regarding the strength
and condi tioning facility is not properly collected and its equipment is
not properly maintained, legal liability for injuries can occur. Claims
of negligence may be made if injuries occur and appropriate
precautions were not taken. Strength and condi tioning professionals
have a variety of responsibi lities in the day-to-da y operation of a
strength and condi tioning facility, including an awareness of the
proper function  and repair of all equipment to reduce the possibi lity
of product liability. To provide direction to athletes and the strength
and conditioning staff and to minimiz e the likelihood of litigation,
each facility should have its own unique policies and procedur es
manual, with guidel ines included for each topic covered in this
chapter .
KEY TERMS
assumption of risk
breach of dut y
damages
duty
emergency action plan
informed consent
liability
litigation
mission statement
negligence
performance team
1817
policies
procedur es
product l iability
program goals
program objectiv e
proximate cause
risk management
scope of pr actice
standar d of car e
statute of l imitations
STUDY QUESTIONS
  1.  The f ollowing ar e effective criteria f or a mission statement:
  a.  It pr escribes means and methods of tr aining.
  b.  It addr esses and matches the or ganization’ s scope of
practice.
  c.  It should be gener al and ambiguous.
  d.  It lends i tself to individual interpr etation.
  2.  Which of the following  is not traditional ly a part of the
performance team?
  a.  sports nutri tionist
  b.  sport psy chologist
  c.  equipment manager
  d.  ex ercise ph ysiologist
  3.  The following four elements must exist for a strength and
condi tioning pr ofessional to be f ound negl igent:
  a.  dut y, breach of dut y, proximate cause, and damages
  b.  sovereign immuni ty, breach of dut y, proximate cause, and
damages
  c.  dut y, breach, assumption of risk, and damages
  d.  dut y, breach of dut y, informed consent, and damages
  4.  Which of the following is defined as a legal responsibi lity, duty,
or obl igation?
1818
  a.  statute of l imitations
  b.  assumption of risk
  c.  inf ormed consent
  d.  liability
  5.  Unless the exercise being supervised and implemented
involves complex movements, strength and condi tioning
activities should be planned and the requisi te number of
qualified staff for college athletes should be available such that
recommended guidel ines for professional-to-participant ratios
at a minimum shal l be which of the f ollowing?
  a.  1:35
  b.  1:20
  c.  1:30
  d.  1:25
1819
1820
ANSWERS TO STUDY
QUESTIONS
Chapter 1
1. b, 2. c, 3. d, 4 . c, 5. a
Chapter 2
1. a, 2. c, 3. c, 4 . a, 5. c
Chapter 3
1. c, 2. b , 3. b, 4. a, 5. b
Chapter 4
1. b, 2. c, 3. c, 4 . c, 5. b
Chapter 5
1. a, 2. a, 3. b , 4. c, 5. c
Chapter 6
1. d, 2. c, 3. b , 4. a, 5. d
Chapter 7
1. b, 2. a, 3. c, 4 . d, 5. c
Chapter 8
1. b, 2. c, 3. a, 4 . b, 5. a
Chapter 9
1. b, 2. d, 3. a, 4 . b, 5. c
Chapter 10
1. c, 2. b , 3. d, 4 . b, 5. c
1821
Chapter 11
1. b, 2. c, 3. b , 4. c, 5. b
Chapter 12
1. a, 2. c, 3. d, 4 . b, 5. c
Chapter 13
1. c, 2. b , 3. c, 4 . b, 5. b
Chapter 14
1. b, 2. d, 3. a, 4 . a, 5. a
Chapter 15
1. c, 2. b , 3. a, 4 . b, 5. a
Chapter 16
1. c, 2. a, 3. a, 4 . c, 5. a
Chapter 17
1. b, 2. c, 3. a, 4 . c, 5. b
Chapter 18
1. c, 2. c, 3. c, 4 . a, 5. d
Chapter 19
1. d, 2. c, 3. c, 4 . b, 5. a
Chapter 20
1. c, 2. a, 3. c, 4 . b, 5. d
Chapter 21
1. d, 2. b , 3. a, 4 . d, 5. a
Chapter 22
1. b, 2. a, 3. c, 4 . d, 5. a
Chapter 23
1. a, 2. b , 3. b, 4. c, 5. d
1822
Chapter 24
1. a, 2. a, 3. a, 4 . a, 5. a
Chapter 25
1. c, 2. b , 3. a, 4 . c, 5. a
Chapter 26
1. b, 2. c, 3. a, 4 . d, 5. b
1823
1824
INDEX
Note:  The i talicized f and t following page numbers r efer to figur es and tables, r espectiv ely.
1-repetition maximum (1RM)
defini tion of  543
estimating  545-546 , 547-548 t
percentage of  543-545 , 544t, 552-553
RM continuum  550-551 , 551f
testing at  545, 546f
1.5-mi le run  321, 354t, 355t
2-for-2 rule  554
3-cone dri ll 298
5-0-5 test  298, 326, 326f, 654, 655
5-10-5 test  298, 326, 326f, 361t
12-minute run  321, 357t
30-15 intermi ttent fi tness test (IF T) 323, 323f, 359f
90-second bo x jump test  317, 317f, 350t
300-yard shut tle run  316, 316f, 349t
A
abdominal ex ercises 418-419
acceleration 36-37 , 39, 43-47 , 298-299 , 638-640 , 640f, 668
accentuated ec centric loading (AEL)  486-488 , 487f, 488f, 489f, 516
acclimatization  124-129 , 125f, 126f, 128f, 711-712
accommodating r esistance  481
acromegaly  266
actin 4f, 5-9, 6f, 7f, 41, 42f, 79, 100, 103
action potential  7-9, 97, 98, 371, 641
active rest 704, 708, 732t, 734-736 , 738, 764
adenosine diphosphate (ADP)  8, 54-60 , 55f, 57f, 62-63 , 62f, 67, 274
adenosine triphosphatase (A TPase) 8, 9, 11, 54, 102-103 , 102f
adenosine triphosphate (A TP)
aerobic tr aining and  118, 120
anaer obic tr aining and  93, 103
chemical structur e of 54, 55f
creatine phosphate and  274
depletion and r epletion  65, 66
glycolysis and  56-61 , 57f, 65t, 118
1825
muscle contr action and  8
muscle fiber pr oduction of  9
oxidativ e system and  61-63 , 65t
phosphagen system and  54-56 , 65t
strength testing and  296
Adequate I ntake (AI)  199, 216, 217
adolescents. See children and adolescents
adrenal hormones  88-90
aerobic, defined  54
aerobic capaci ty
adaptations to aer obic tr aining  117-118 , 122
anaer obic tr aining and  112
athletic perf ormance and  297-298
EPO injections and  267
female athletes and  161
interv al training and  70
maximal  127, 694-695
tests of  287t, 292, 321-323
aerobic endur ance sports
cross-tr aining and  696
during-ev ent nutri tion for 232, 234
periodization of tr aining f or 726
postcompeti tion nutri tion for 236-237
precompeti tion nutri tion for 228-230 , 230t, 233t
resistance tr aining and  111, 785
aerobic endur ance testing  231, 289, 290
aerobic power . See aerobic capaci ty
aerobic (slow) gly colysis  56, 64t, 65t
aerobic system. See oxidativ e system
aerobic tr aining  115-131 . See also  aerobic tr aining pr ogram design
altitude and  122, 124, 124f, 127-129 , 128f, 711
bioener getics and  58, 66, 69, 71-72
blood doping and  130
cardiovascular r esponses and adaptations to  19-21 , 110, 115-117 , 116t, 121
compatibi lity with anaer obic tr aining  111-113
connectiv e tissue adaptations to  116t, 118-119
control of local cir culation and  21
detraining f ollowing cessation of  131
endocrine adaptations to  120
equipment arr angement  806, 806t
genetic potential and  130
heat ac climatization and  124-129 , 125f, 126f, 128f
hyperoxic br eathing and  129
muscular adaptations to  102, 103, 116-118 , 116t, 121
neural adaptations to  117
for older adul ts 149
1826
oxygen uptak e and  20-21 , 117, 121, 122, 124, 694-695
performance impr ovements f ollowing  121
physiological v ariables in  122, 123t
plyometric tr aining wi th 576
for rehabi litation and r econdi tioning  768-770
resistance tr aining wi th 111-113 , 119, 709-711
respiratory r esponses and adaptations to  21-23 , 22f, 117, 121
smoking/v aping and  129-130
target heart r ate for 698, 699
aerobic tr aining pr ogram design  693-720
duration of ex ercise and  701
exercise examples  713-720
exercise pr ogression and  701-702
frequency of tr aining  696-697
intensi ty of tr aining  697-701 , 697t, 701f
mode of ex ercise and  696
performance-r elated f actors and  694-695
special issues r elated to  708-712
specificity of tr aining  693-694
sport season appl ications  704-708 , 705t
types of tr aining pr ograms 702-704 , 702t
age consider ations. See also  children and adolescents ; older adul ts
flexibi lity and  375
plyometric tr aining and  575
test selection and  288-289
agility. See also  change-of -direction abi lity
defini tion of  298, 637, 638
development of  661, 661-662 t, 668, 670-673 , 670f, 670t, 671t, 672-673 t
mechanics of  638-641
neurophysiological consider ations  642-643
perceptual-cogni tive ability and  638, 641, 643, 654-656 , 663, 664t, 670
technical guidel ines and coaching  656-657
tests of  287t, 291-292 , 298, 324-327 , 361t, 654-656 , 655t
training goals  661
training pr ogram design  665
transitional mo vements and  657-658 , 658-660 f
agility drills 685-691
alcohol  198, 204, 208, 210, 268
allied heal th teams  755-757 , 763, 764, 768, 770
all-or-none principle  9
allostatic load  784-785 , 785f, 787
allosteric binding si tes 60, 79, 80f
alternated grip  412, 412f
alternativ e modes of ex ercise
bodyweight tr aining methods  478-479 , 498-501
core stabi lity and balance tr aining methods  479-481 , 502-504
1827
examples of  515-523
gener al guidel ines f or 477-478
variable-r esistance tr aining methods  481-488
altitude
aerobic tr aining and  122, 124, 124f, 127-129 , 128f, 711
blood doping and  130
dehydration risk and  216
sickle cel l trait and 773
test selection and  289
alveoli 17-19 , 18f, 21
amenorrhea  247, 249
Americans wi th Disabi lities Act of 1990 (ADA)  802, 825
amine hormones  81-82
amino acids  60-65 , 62f, 64f, 80-81 , 86-87 , 200-201 , 200t, 232, 269-270 , 279
amortization phase of ply ometric ex ercise 567-568 , 568t
anabol ic hormones  78-79 , 82-85 , 87, 89, 101, 109, 120
Anabol ic Ster oid Contr ol Act of 2004  261, 262
anabol ic ster oids 101, 109, 255-262 , 258t, 260f
anaer obic, defined  54
anaer obic capaci ty 69, 287t, 292, 297-298 , 317, 667
anaer obic (f ast) gly colysis  56, 64t, 65, 65t, 103, 704
anaer obic power  69, 71, 296-297 , 305-315
anaer obic tr aining  93-114
cardiovascular r esponses and adaptations to  23-24 , 110
compatibi lity with aer obic tr aining  111-113
connectiv e tissue adaptations to  95t, 103-109 , 104f, 107f
detraining f ollowing cessation of  99, 102, 113
endocrine r esponses and adaptations to  109
endur ance tr aining and  71, 112
exercise pr escription principles  525-528
metabol ic demands b y sport  94, 94-95 t
muscular adaptations to  95t, 100-103 , 102f
neural adaptations to  96-100 , 96f, 97f
performance impr ovements f ollowing  112
for rehabi litation and r econdi tioning  768-770
respiratory r esponses to  24
anatomical cor e 479
anatomical dead space  21, 22f
anatomical planes  32-33 , 33f, 34-35 f
anatomical posi tion 32, 33f
androgens  83-85 , 109, 255, 256, 259-260 , 262-265
anemia  199, 215, 267
angular displacement  38-39
angular v elocity 39, 42-43 , 42f, 45
annual tr aining plans  727, 728t, 734-752 , 735f
anorexia nerv osa 247-248
1828
anterior cruciate l igament (ACL) injuries  158, 481, 577, 770
anthropometry  287t, 301, 334, 569
anxiet y 169-178 , 170f, 181-186 , 182t, 189, 247, 268, 277-278
appendicular sk eleton  2, 104
arginine  270-271 , 279
arm str etches  385, 386
Army Fitness T est (AF T) 320, 320f
arousal 169-173 , 170f, 172f, 176-179 , 189, 255, 260
arteries and arterioles  16, 16f, 21, 116
arterio venous o xygen di fference 20
arthrogenic inhibi tion 765
artificial intel ligence (AI)  301
assessment. See tests and testing
assistance ex ercises 532-534 , 541
assumption of risk  825
asthma  18, 130, 267, 278
athletic identi ty 185, 187
athleticism  133-134 , 138, 141, 145, 259, 295
athletic motor ski ll competencies (AMSC)  145, 146f, 299-300 , 299f
athletic perf ormance, measuring par ameters of  281-334
athletic pr ofiles 295, 337, 529-533
athletic tr ainers  188, 195, 196, 651, 758, 759, 763-765
atrioventricular (A V) bundle  14
atrioventricular (A V) node  14, 15, 15f
attention  168-171 , 174-177 , 176f, 180, 183, 190
autogenic inhibi tion 378, 379
autogenic tr aining  177
avoidant/r estrictiv e food intak e disor der (ARFID)  249
axial sk eleton  2, 104, 478
B
back ex ercises 420-425
back injuries  48-50
backpedal ing 657-658 , 658-659 f
back squats  300, 305, 344t, 579
back str etches  385-387
balance
defini tion of  300, 579
plyometric tr aining and  579, 579t
proprioception and  763
tests f or 287t, 300, 328-329
training f or 149, 479-481 , 502-504
balance err or scoring system (BES S) 300, 328, 328f, 363t
ballistic ex ercises 534, 541, 565, 571-572
banned substances  253-257 , 264t, 832. See also  performance-enhancing substances
base tr aining. See off-season
1829
basic str ength phase of periodization  730t, 731
bench pr ess 304, 321, 339t, 340t, 341t, 342-343 t, 344t, 352t
bench pul l 304, 304f, 342-343 t
β-adr energic agonists  267-268
β-alanine  272-273 , 279
β-block ers 268-269
β-hydroxy-β-meth ylbutyrate (HMB)  271-272 , 279
biceps ex ercises 426-427
bicuspid (mi tral) valve 14, 15f
bilateral asymmetries  495
bilateral defici t 99, 495
bilateral facilitation  99, 495
binge-eating disor der 246, 247, 248
bioelectrical impedance (BIA)  334
bioener getics  53-72
energy systems and  54-65
limiting factors in ex ercise perf ormance  67, 67t
metabol ic speci ficity and  53, 69-72 , 70t
oxygen uptak e and  68-69 , 68f, 69f
substr ate depletion and r epletion  65-66
terminology r elated to  53-54
biological age and matur ation 136, 138
biomechanics  27-51
defini tion of  27
joint biomechanics  48-51
movement pat tern speci ficity 288
planes of mo vement and  32-33 , 33f, 34-35 f
skeletal musculatur e and  27-32
sources of r esistance to muscle contr action  43-48
of strength and power  36-43
bitter or ange 278-279
blood doping  130, 266-267
blood pr essure. See diastol ic blood pr essure; systol ic blood pr essure
blood v essels  16-17 , 16f, 104
body composi tion
aerobic tr aining and  122
age-related changes in  147
anaer obic tr aining and  112
β-adr energic agonists and  267
measur ement of  300-301 , 332-334 , 364t, 365t, 366t
nutrition str ategies f or altering  243-246
percentile rankings  354t, 355t
pubert y and changes in  134
sex-related di fferences in  163
weight gain or loss  243-246
body mass index (BMI)  119, 245, 246t
1830
bodyweight tr aining methods  478-479 , 498-501
bone. See also  fractures; musculosk eletal system
aerobic tr aining adaptations  118-119
age-related changes in  147, 147f, 150
anaer obic tr aining adaptations  103-105 , 104f
of chi ldren and adolescents  137-138 , 137f, 156, 216
formation and gr owth of  86, 87, 103-106 , 118-119
physiological char acteristics of  104
protein intak e and heal th of 201
resistance tr aining and  3, 82, 105-106
bone mass  105-106 , 108, 118-119 , 143, 160, 201, 216, 245
bone matrix  103, 105, 106
bone miner al densi ty (BMD)  105-106 , 119, 142-143 , 147-150 , 156, 160, 216, 247, 263
bone periosteum  3, 103
bone str ess injuries  158
bounds  570, 570t, 573, 601-605
box drills 606-615
box jumps  317, 317f, 350t, 570, 570t, 580, 612, 614, 617
bracketing technique  46
bradycardia 16, 117, 269
braking impulse  641, 643, 656
branched-chain amino acids (B CAAs)  63, 232, 269-270 , 279
breach of dut y 825
breathing during r esistance tr aining  413, 478
broad jumps  346-348 t
bronchi and br onchioles  17, 18f, 21, 129
bulimia nerv osa 247-249
C
caffeine 254, 276-277 , 279
calcium  198-199 , 201, 213, 213t, 215-216 , 218
calf exercises 428-429
calf stretches  393-394 , 408
caloric intak e. See nutrition
capillaries 11, 16-19 , 16f, 24, 103, 115-116
carboh ydrate loading  229-232 , 233t, 254
carboh ydrates
classification of  202, 204-205
during-ev ent nutri tion and  232, 234, 235
as ener gy sour ce 53, 54, 202
glycemic index and  205-206 , 205t, 207t, 228
glycemic load and  206, 207t
glycolysis and  56-60
guidel ines f or 210
low-carboh ydrate diets  245
oxidation of  61-63 , 64f
1831
postcompeti tion nutri tion and  236-238
postex ercise intak e of 66, 120, 697
precompeti tion nutri tion and  228-232 , 233t
preexercise intak e of 85, 109
carbon mono xide 129
cardiovascular system
aerobic tr aining and  19-21 , 110, 115-117 , 116t, 121
anaer obic tr aining and  23-24 , 110
structur e and f unction of  1, 14-17 , 15f, 16f
cartilage 2, 106-109 , 119, 137-138 , 479
catabol ic hormones  78-79 , 83
catastr ophe theory  173
catecholamines  19, 61, 88-89 , 129-130 , 169, 255, 268, 781
celiac disease  206, 215
central tendency measur es 335
certifications  196, 197, 758, 799, 824, 834
chain-supplemented ex ercises 482-483 , 482t, 483f
change-of -direction (COD) abi lity
ACL injuries and  158
defini tion of  637, 638
development of  662, 663t, 668, 670
factors af fecting  654-656 , 654f
monitoring  670, 672-673 t, 673
neurophysiological consider ations  642-643
physics of  638-641
plant phase of  639-640 , 643f, 654
resistance tr aining and  140
technical guidel ines and coaching  656-657
tests f or 298, 324-327 , 360t
chest ex ercises 430-435
chest str etches  384, 408
children and adolescents  134-146
dehydration risk among  216
detraining ef fects in  140
early sport special ization among  143
fluid intak e guidel ines f or 219, 232, 234
growth, dev elopment, and matur ation of  134, 136-139
injuries in  136, 143, 144
muscle and bone gr owth in  137-138 , 137f, 156, 216
nutrition consider ations  201, 215-216 , 239, 241
overweight and obese  142
plyometric tr aining f or 575
resistance tr aining f or 134, 137, 139-146 , 142f, 146f
strength dev elopment in  138-141 , 142f
YPD model f or 134, 135f
cholester ol 110, 204, 206, 208, 210t, 259
1832
chronological age  134, 136, 139
circuit training  541, 807-808
circulatory system  16f, 17, 20, 23
citrus aur antium  278-279
classic f ormula  43
clean grip  412
clenbuter ol 267-268
closed grip  412
closed kinetic chain ex ercises 764-766 , 766f
coaching
agility and COD abi lity 656-657
of chi ldren and adolescents  139
feedback in  175, 181, 183, 190-192
instructional st yles in  191
motiv ational cl imate and  790
positive and negativ e reinforcement in  174-175
sprinting technical err ors and  646, 648, 649-650 t
codes of ethics  830, 831
cogni tive anxiet y 169, 170, 173
Cogni tive Appr aisal Model  187-188 , 187f
cold exposur e 130, 289, 774
collagen fibers  13f, 103, 104f, 106-108 , 107f, 119, 758, 760-764
combination tr aining  71-72
competi tive period of periodization  729f, 730t, 731-732
compound sets  542
concentric muscle action  42-43 , 42f, 47, 378-379 , 380f, 566-568 , 568t, 763
concurr ent tr aining  71-72 , 111-113 , 119, 239, 495, 536, 694, 709-711
concurr ent validity 284
concussions  158-159
condi tional ly essential amino acids  200, 200t
connectiv e tissue. See also speci fic types of connectiv e tissue
aerobic tr aining adaptations  116t, 118-119
anaer obic tr aining adaptations  95t, 103-109 , 104f, 107f
elastici ty and plastici ty of 375
muscle anatom y and  3, 4f, 13
muscle at tachments and  27, 28
resistance tr aining and  82, 83
constant external r esistance  481
construction phase f or new f acilities 798f, 799
construct v alidity 283-284
content v alidity 284
contract-relax technique  378, 379, 380f
contusions  759, 760
convergent v alidity 283-284
conversion f actors  37, 37t
core exercises 532-534 , 541
1833
core stabi lity training methods  479-481 , 502-504
Cori cy cle 58, 58f
cortical bone  104, 105
cortisol  76, 78-80 , 88-89 , 109, 120, 162, 208
counselors  183-184 , 759
counter condi tioning  177-178
countermo vement jumps  141, 530-531 , 531f, 566, 568, 571, 578, 661
creatine kinase  55-56 , 234
creatine phosphate (CP)  55-56 , 60, 65-66 , 70, 103, 274
creatine supplementation  274-276 , 275f, 279
criterion v alidity 284
crossbridges  5, 7-9, 7f, 11, 41, 42f, 54, 57, 103
cross-education  99
cross-linking  107, 108
cross-tr aining  33, 71, 696, 708, 709
cryotherapy 762
cycle er gometers  46, 69, 69t, 229, 272, 297, 700
cytochr omes  62, 62f
D
daily adjustable pr ogressive resistiv e exercise (DAPRE) system  768, 768t
daily undulating periodization model  734
damages  825, 826
deceler ation 638-643 , 655-657 , 661, 663
dehydration 125, 217-219 , 232, 236, 246, 773
depolarization  16
depression  159, 182-184 , 182t, 186, 188
depth hops  570t, 621
depth jumps  570t, 571, 573, 575, 580, 616-621
descriptiv e statistics  335
Designer Anabol ic Ster oid Contr ol Act of 2014 (DA SCA) 262
design phase f or new f acilities 798-799 , 798f
detraining  99, 102, 113, 131, 140, 150, 709
diaphr agm 17, 18, 49, 49f
diaphr agmatic br eathing  176-177
diastol ic blood pr essure 20-21 , 110, 151
diet. See nutrition
Dietary R eference I ntakes (DRI s) 198-199 , 201
dietary supplements. See also speci fic supplements
contamination of  253
defini tion of  255
legal issues and  830
performance-enhancing  253, 269-279
regulation of  254
websi tes related to  199
diet-induced thermogenesis  243
1834
dietitians 196-198 , 201, 206, 215-216 , 244, 246, 759
difference scor e 335
diffusion 11, 18-19 , 22, 23, 108-109 , 117
diminishing r eturns principle  335
directors of str ength and condi tioning  821-823 , 822f
disaccharides  204, 230
discipl ine 829-830
discovery instructional st yle 191
discriminant v alidity 283, 284
dislocations  51, 759
disordered eating  227, 247, 249
displacement  36-39
distress 170, 182-184 , 186
diuretics 217, 246, 247, 261
doping  130, 253, 255, 266-267 . See also  performance-enhancing substances
double pr oduct  20
downr egulation  79, 82, 100, 109, 783
drive theory  171
drop jumps  299, 312, 312f, 313f
drug testing  260, 266, 276
dual-ener gy X-ray absorptiometry (D XA) 105, 245, 300
during-ev ent nutri tion 232, 234-236
duty, breach of  825
duty cycles 71
dynapenia  149
E
eating. See nutrition
eating disor ders 196, 227, 246-250
eccentric muscle action  42, 42f, 43, 47-48 , 566-568 , 568t, 765
eccentric str ength defici t 486f
effect siz e 337
ejection f raction  19
elastici ty 48, 375
elastin  107
elbow injuries  51
electr ocardiogram (ECG)  16, 16f
electr olytes  198, 213, 217-219 , 229, 235, 236
electr omyography (EMG)  12, 98-99 , 113, 169
electr on transport chain (ET C) 57f, 59, 62-63 , 62f, 120
elliptical tr ainers  718, 803, 805, 807
emergency planning and r esponse  834, 835f
emotions, defined  169
emphasis tr aining models  727, 727f
end-diastol ic volume  19, 23, 110
ender gonic r eactions  53-54
1835
endocrine system  75-91 , 76f, 77t, 109, 120, 161-163 . See also  hormones
endom ysium  3, 4f
end-systol ic volume  110
endur ance tr aining. See also  aerobic tr aining
anaer obic 71, 112
bioener getics and  58, 66, 67, 69, 71-72
extensiv e 702-703 , 702t
muscular adaptations to  84, 102, 103
nutrition for 239-240
plyometric tr aining wi th 72
resistance tr aining wi th 67, 72, 111-113 , 119, 709-711
rest periods during  561
volume of tr aining  559-560
energy. See also  bioener getics
availability of 247
expendi ture of 243, 244t
management of  169-170
sources of  53, 54, 202, 208
substr ates 58, 61, 65-66 , 91, 202
types of  37, 208, 566
yield in gly colysis  59-60 , 93
energy drinks  228, 277-279
energy systems
glycolytic  54, 56-61 , 64-65 , 64t, 65t, 86, 94, 94-95 t
oxidativ e 54, 61-65 , 64t, 65t, 93, 94-95 t
phosphagen  54-56 , 64, 64t, 65t, 93-94 , 94-95 t
environmental f actors. See also  altitude; heat
cold 130, 289, 776
outdoor tr aining spaces and  800
in test selection and administr ation 289-290 , 290f
ephedrine/ephedr a 278, 279
epimysium  3, 4f
epinephrine  19, 76, 77t, 79, 81-82 , 88-89 , 254-255 , 267, 783
epiph yseal plates  137, 138, 144, 155
equipment  301, 302, 536, 580, 805-809 , 808t, 809-810 t, 812t, 817-819 f
ergogenic aids  253-279 , 261t, 832. See also  performance-enhancing substances
ergolytic ef fects 269
erythr opoietin (EPO)  127, 130, 255, 266-267
essential amino acids (EAAs)  200, 200t, 269-270 , 279
estradiol 77t, 80, 162-163
estrogen 78, 86, 137, 156, 162-163 , 163f
ethical codes  830, 831
eustress 170
evaluation, defined  283. See also  tests and testing
evidence-based testing  282
excess postex ercise o xygen consumption (EPOC)  68-69 , 69f
1836
exercise. See training and ex ercise
exercise econom y 121, 122, 694-695 , 698, 703-704
exercise-induced asthma  18
exercise-induced muscle damage (EIMD)  100-101
exercise ph ysiologists  759
exercise technique experience  530, 532, 536, 545
exergonic r eactions  53-54
explicit instructions  191
extrafusal muscle fibers  13, 13f, 14, 376
F
face validity 284
facilities 797-835
athletic pr ogram needs and  800-801
design and la yout 801-804 , 812f, 813f
emergency planning and r esponse  834, 835f
equipment arr angement in  805-809 , 807t, 807-808 t
ethical issues f or 830, 831
legal issues f or 819, 820, 824-830
maintenance and cleaning wi thin 809, 810t, 814f, 815-817 f
minimal ly compl iant 800
mission statements and pr ogram goals f or 820
modifying existing f acilities 799, 799f
new f acility design  797-799 , 798f
outdoor tr aining spaces  800
performance teams at  820-824 , 821t, 824f
for ply ometric tr aining  580
policies and pr ocedur es for 819
program objectiv es for 820-821
rules and guidel ines f or 832, 833f
satellite training f acilities 800
staff policies and activi ties 830-832
false grip  412, 412f
farmer ’s walk 492
Fartlek tr aining  702t, 704
fascia 106-108
fascicul i 3, 4f
fast (anaer obic) gly colysis  56, 64t, 65, 65t, 103, 704
fast-twitch muscle fibers. See type II muscle fibers
fats 53-54 , 61, 63, 64f, 198, 207-210 , 209t. See also  triglycerides
fatty acids  60-66 , 62f, 64f, 118, 206-209
feasibi lity studies  800
feedback  175, 181, 183, 190-192
fiber 199, 204, 206, 228
fibroblastic r epair phase  762, 762t, 764-765 , 769, 771t
fibroblasts  106, 108, 760
1837
fibrosis, defined  375
field tests  282-284 , 288, 297, 298
fight-or-flight response  89, 120, 176, 177, 181
first-class lev ers 28, 29, 29f
first tr ansition period of periodization  729f, 730t, 731
fitness–f atigue par adigm  724-725 , 725f
five-point body contact posi tion 412
flexibi lity 112, 149, 177, 287t, 300, 330-331 , 374-376 . See also  range of motion ; stretching
fluid bal l 49, 49f
fluid intak e 216, 218-219 , 228-229 , 230t, 232, 234-236 . See also  hydration
fluid r esistance  47-48
focal dystonia  181
focus 168, 171, 173-177 , 176f, 179-183 , 190, 191
food al lergies and sensi tivities 206
force
defini tion of  29, 638
rate of f orce dev elopment  638-641 , 639f, 651
resistiv e 28-30 , 36, 42, 47-48
rotational  38-39
forced repetitions 414
force–time curv e 296, 306f, 309f, 311f, 313f, 638, 640
force–velocity relationship  32, 42f, 46, 552, 566, 656, 661
forearm ex ercises 436-437
formativ e evaluation  283
form dr ag 47
fractional ization  190
fractures
classification of  757
epiph yseal plate  138, 144
force required for 104
in older adul ts 147, 148
osteopor osis and  143, 150
stress 106, 158, 213, 760
Frank-Starling mechanism  19
free-style swimming  720
free weight ex ercises
advantages of  45
chains appl ied to  483, 483f
equipment arr angement  806
ground-based  479, 480
machine-based ex ercises vs.  106, 480
moment arm and  30-31 , 31f
muscle actions and  47
resistance bands appl ied to  485, 485f
spotting 414-416 , 415f, 833
friction  46-47
1838
frontal plane  32, 33f, 34-35 f
fructose  202, 204, 219, 230, 234, 236, 239
fulcrum  28-30 , 28f
functional capaci ty 85, 117, 698, 699, 725
functional mo vement scr een (FMS)  299, 300
functional o verreaching (FOR)  701, 784, 782f, 783f
G
galactose  202, 204, 234
gastrointestinal issues  125, 228-230 , 234, 249, 271, 273, 276-277 , 279
gener al adaptation syndr ome (GA S) 543, 723, 724f, 778, 778f, 779
gener al preparatory phase of periodization  729, 730t
girth measur ements  334, 334f
glottis 18, 18f, 49, 413, 478
gluconeogenesis  58, 63, 66, 88, 202, 232
glucose
Cori cy cle and  58, 58f
depletion and r epletion  66
during-ev ent nutri tion and  234, 235
in food pr oducts  202
glycolysis and  56-60 , 57f
hormones and  81, 86, 88, 91
oxidation of  62-63 , 63t
precompeti tion nutri tion and  228
in sport drinks  219
starch as stor age form in plants  204
glycemic index (GI)  205-206 , 205t, 207t, 228
glycemic load (GL)  206, 207t
glycogen
depletion and r epletion  65-67
during-ev ent nutri tion and  234, 235
in food pr oducts  204-205
glycolysis and  56-58 , 57f, 60, 103
muscle fiber structur e and  3
oxidation of  61, 62, 118
as polysac charide  202
postcompeti tion nutri tion and  236-238
precompeti tion nutri tion and  228-232
synthesis of  91, 236, 240
glycogenesis  88, 205
glycogenolysis  60, 66
glycolysis  56-65 , 57f, 59f, 64t, 65t, 93, 103, 118, 704
glycolytic enzymes  58, 60, 161
glycolytic system  54, 56-61 , 64-65 , 64t, 65t, 86, 94, 94-95 t
goal r epetitions 546
goal set ting 179-181 , 189, 281
1839
Golgi tendon or gans (GT Os) 13f, 14, 378, 569
gravity 12, 36, 37, 39, 40, 44-45
grip width  412, 412f
groin str etches  392-393 , 408
ground-based f ree weight ex ercises 479, 480
ground contact time  639-640 , 643, 644, 648, 654, 669t, 672t
ground r eaction f orces (GRFs)  484, 578, 640f, 642f, 653-654 , 654f
growth hormone (GH)
aerobic tr aining and  120
anaer obic tr aining and  109
performance enhancement and  255, 263, 265-266
physiological actions of  77t, 78-81 , 83
resistance tr aining and  82, 86, 87f, 90, 162
thyroid hormones and  91
types of  85-86 , 86f
growth plates. See epiph yseal plates
guanine triphosphate (GTP)  62, 62f, 63
guided disco very 191
H
handgrips  411-412 , 412f
hand-r elease push-ups (HRPs)  320, 320f, 351t
head str ength and condi tioning pr ofessionals  823-825 , 824f
Health Insurance P ortabi lity and Ac countabi lity Act (HIP AA) 196, 828, 832
heart 14-16 , 15f, 19, 23, 110. See also  cardiovascular system
heat
acclimatization to  124-129 , 125f, 126f, 128f, 711-712
test selection and administr ation in  289-290 , 290f
heat cr amps  775
heat exhaustion  773-774
heat str ess 125, 126, 216, 217
heatstr oke 216, 776
heat syncope  775
hematocri t 130, 267
hemoglobin  17, 23, 124, 127, 129, 215, 266-267 , 774
hexagon test  325, 325f
hexokinase  57f, 60
high-densi ty lipoproteins (HDL)  208, 210t, 259, 262, 263
high-intensi ty interv al training (HIIT ) 70-71 , 695, 702t, 704
high-intensi ty sports  229, 231, 234-235 , 237-238
high-speed muscular str ength  296-297 , 305-315
hip ex ercises 438-456
hip str etches  388-391 , 409
hold-r elax technique  378, 379, 379f, 380f
hook grip  412, 412f
hops 570, 570t, 571, 583, 589, 592, 594-600 , 610, 613, 621
1840
hormones. See also speci fic hormones
aerobic tr aining and  120
anaer obic tr aining and  109
classification of  80-81
mechanisms f or release of  78
muscle as tar get for inter actions wi th 79
performance-enhancing  254-269
peripher al blood changes and  82-83
physiological actions of  77t
receptors in mediation of changes in volving  79, 80f, 109
resistance tr aining and  76, 78, 79, 82-91 , 109
signal ing pr ocesses and  76, 78
human chorionic gonadotr opin (HCG)  265
human gr owth hormone (HGH)  265-266
hydration 216-219 , 217t, 228-229 , 232, 235-236 , 301, 775-776 , 806. See also  dehydration
hydrolysis  8, 54-56 , 55f, 58-60 , 274
hyperoxic br eathing  129
hyperplasia  101, 137
hypertr ophy
in chi ldren and adolescents  137, 141
connectiv e tissue and  108
high-intensi ty interv al training and  71
hormones and  83, 84, 89, 90, 120
nutrition for 239, 240
in older adul ts 149, 150, 153
protein intak e and  202
resistance tr aining and  40-41 , 66, 82, 98-103
rest periods r equired for 561
size principle and  97
training v olume and  559
in women  160, 161, 163
hypertr ophy phase of periodization  730-731 , 730t
hyperv entilation  122, 124, 775, 776
hypohydration 216
hyponatr emia 218
hypothermia  774
hypoxia 122, 124, 124f, 127, 274
H-zone 6-7, 6f, 7f
I
ideal perf ormance state  167-169
Illinois test  327, 327f, 361t, 655
imagery  177, 178
impulse  36, 39, 638-641 , 640f, 643-644 , 648, 651, 656-665
impulse–momentum r elationship  36, 39, 638
individual z ones of optional f unctioning theory  172-173
1841
inertia  40, 45-47
inferential statistics  336-337
inflammatory r esponse phase  760-762 , 760t, 767, 768t
informed consent  825
injuries. See also  rehabi litation and r econdi tioning ; specific injuries
analysis of  529
in chi ldren and adolescents  136, 143, 144
in older adul ts 147, 151
overuse  51, 136, 143, 158, 760
psychological impact of  185-189 , 186f, 187f
in resistance tr aining  48-51
risk reduction  770, 771f, 772f
screening f or risk of  282-283
in women  156, 158-160
inorganic phosphate (Pi)  8, 54, 55f
in-season  705t, 708, 735, 735f, 737-738 , 750-754
instabi lity devices  480-481
instructional principles  831
instructional st yles 191
insulin 77t, 78, 80-82 , 91, 109, 120, 156, 205-206 , 228, 265
insulin-like growth f actors (IGFs)  77t, 78, 82, 87-88 , 91, 109, 120, 162, 201, 266
insulin resistance  75, 79, 91, 142, 245
insurance, l iability 828
International Olympic Commi ttee (IOC)  197, 255, 278
International S ystem of Uni ts (SI)  37, 37t
interr ater r eliability 285
inter-set rest 560-562 , 561t
interv al training  69-71 , 70t, 121, 695, 702t, 703-704
intra-abdominal pr essure 18, 23, 49-50
intrafusal muscle fibers  13, 13f, 376
intrarater v ariabi lity 286
intrasubject v ariabi lity 285
inverted-U theory  171-172 , 172f
iron 199, 213-215 , 214t
irritable bowel syndr ome (IBS)  206
isokinetic ex ercise 43, 481, 536, 765
isokinetic str ength testing  36
isolation ex ercises 479-480
isometric ex ercise 378-379 , 379f, 380f, 765
isometric mid-thigh pul l (IMTP)  305-306 , 305f, 306f, 344t, 530, 530f
isometric muscle action  42, 42f, 479-480
isometric str ength testing  36, 295, 305-306 , 305f, 306f, 344t
isotonic ex ercise 763
J
joint angle  32f, 38-42 , 300
1842
joint angular v elocity 42-43 , 42f
joints. See also  range of motion
biomechanics of  48-51
dislocations and subluxations  51, 759
stability of 50, 99, 763, 766
types of  2, 3, 28, 50, 375
jumps in place  573, 578, 583-590
K
kettlebel l training  493-494 , 493f, 494f, 520
knee injuries  50-51 , 158
knowledge of perf ormance  192
knowledge of r esults 191
Krebs cy cle 54, 56, 57f, 59, 62-63 , 62f, 64f, 120
kyphotic spine posi tion 49
L
lactate  56-61 , 57f, 58f, 59f, 61f, 65, 89, 118, 130
lactate thr eshold (L T) 60-61 , 61f, 103, 121-122 , 125, 694-695 , 701
lactic acid  57, 59, 83, 279, 695
lactic acidosis  59
lactose  202, 204, 206
landing err or scoring system  299
landmine ex ercises 494, 517-519
laxativ es 217, 246, 247
L-carni tine 273-274 , 279
L-drill 298
learning vs. perf ormance  189
legal issues
certifications and  824
discipl ine 829-830
eligibility criteria 827
liability 825-829
negligence  820, 825-826
policies and pr ocedur es for protection f rom 819
preparticipation scr eening and medical clear ance 826-827
record-keeping pr actices  827-828
standar d of car e 820, 824-826
supplements, er gogenic aids, and banned substances  830
terminology r elated to  825
leucine  237-240 , 269-271 , 270f, 279
levers of musculosk eletal system  28-31 , 28f, 29f, 30f, 31f
liability insur ance 830
liability issues  825-829
liftoff 415
ligaments  2, 50, 106-108 , 119, 757-758
1843
linear periodization model  734
lipids 201, 206. See also  fats
lipolysis  81, 86, 91, 267, 279
litigation. See legal issues
live high, tr ain low (LHTL) method  711
load. See training load
load– velocity profiles 297, 298f, 661
local muscular endur ance 112, 270, 291-292 , 297, 318-321 , 337
lock-and-k ey theory model  79, 80f
log lifting 491, 506-507
long jumps  308, 344t, 345t, 593, 619
lordotic spine posi tion 49, 413
low-densi ty lipoproteins (LDL)  208, 210t
lower back str etches  386-387
lower body ply ometrics  569-570 , 570t, 572t, 583-621
low-speed muscular str ength  295-296 , 304-305
L-run test  655
lungs  17-18 , 21, 129, 130. See also  respiratory system
M
machine-based tr aining  106, 480
machine learning  301
macrocycles 727, 728t, 732, 734
macronutrients  198, 200-210 . See also  carboh ydrates; fats; proteins
macrotrauma  757-758
magni tude statistics  337
Maillard reaction  200
maintenance pr ograms 730t, 732
Margaria-K alamen test  314, 314f, 349t
mass 36, 37, 43-45
mass action ef fect 56
master plans  798, 799
masters athletes  146, 575. See also  older adul ts
matur ation–r emodel ing phase  760-761 , 760t, 764-767 , 764f, 765f, 769t
Matveyev’s model of periodization  721, 729f
maximal aer obic capaci ty. See maximal o xygen uptak e
maximal aer obic speed (MA S) test  298, 323
maximal lactate steady state (MLS S) 695
maximal o xygen uptak e (V̇O2max)
aerobic tr aining and  19, 21, 117, 121, 122, 124, 694-695
age-related changes in  149
bioener getics and  68f, 69-72 , 69f
blood doping and  130
defini tion of  20
descriptiv e data on  356t
detraining and  131
1844
environmental f actors and  125, 289
glycogenolysis and  66
lactate thr eshold and  60, 61
maximum muscular power  296-297 , 305-315
maximum muscular str ength  295-296 , 304-305
mean (statistic)  335
measur ement, defined  283. See also  tests and testing
mechanical adv antage  28-31 , 30f, 48
mechanical loading  100, 103, 104f, 160
mechanical work  543
mechanotr ansduction  765
median (statistic)  335
medical clear ance 828-829
menstrual cy cle 86, 161-164 , 163f, 215
mental heal th 158, 159, 168, 182-185 , 215, 792
mental imagery  177, 178
mesocy cles 730, 730t, 731, 734-754
metabol ic acidosis  57-61 , 67
metabol ic equiv alent (MET ) 20, 243, 700
metabol ic speci ficity 53, 69-72 , 70t, 286
microcycles 728-735 , 728t, 737-752
microdosing  539
microfibrils 107, 107f
micronutrients  198, 210-216 . See also  miner als; vitamins
microtrauma  758-759
midtests  283
miner als 198, 213-214 t, 213-216
minimal essential str ain (MES)  104
minimal ly compl iant facilities 800
minute v entilation  21
mission statements  820
mitral (bicuspid) v alve 14, 15f
mobility 112, 149, 370, 377, 651, 653
mode (statistic)  335
moment arm  28-31 , 31f, 32f, 44, 45, 45f
momentum  36, 39, 638, 640
monitoring, defined  283. See also  tests and testing
monosac charides  202, 230
monounsatur ated f ats 198, 207, 208
motiv ation 169, 173-175 , 179, 180, 183-186 , 189-190
motor ski ll acquisi tion and learning  189-192
movement analysis  300, 529, 531, 533-536 , 535t
multijoint ex ercises 143, 145, 152, 532, 539, 541, 710
multiple hops and jumps  594-600
muscle. See also  hypertr ophy; musculosk eletal system ; neuromuscular system
actions of  42-43 , 42f, 47-48 , 765
1845
aerobic tr aining adaptations  102, 103, 116-118 , 116t, 121
age-related changes in  147, 148
agonist  28, 46-47 , 96-97 , 99-100 , 148, 376, 378-379 , 380f, 480-481 , 495, 535
anaer obic tr aining adaptations  95t, 100-103 , 102f
anatom y of 3-7, 4f, 5f, 6f
antagonist  28, 47, 96, 99-100 , 148, 376, 379, 535
attachments of  27-28
in chi ldren and adolescents  137-142 , 142f
contraction of  2-3, 5-9, 7f, 9f, 10f, 42-48
dysmorphia of  259
injuries in volving  758
length of  41, 42f
origin and insertion of  27-28
pennate  40-41 , 41f, 103
signal ing pr ocess f or 76, 78
as tar get for hormone inter actions  79
muscle balance  535-536 , 763
muscle buf fering capaci ty (MB C) 70-71 , 103, 272
muscle fibers. See also  type I muscle fibers ; type II muscle fibers
aerobic tr aining adaptations  116, 116t, 118, 121
age-related changes in  148
anaer obic tr aining adaptations  95t, 102-103 , 102f
arrangement of  40-41 , 41f
in chi ldren and adolescents  141
intrafusal and extr afusal 13, 13f, 14, 376
muscular anatom y and  3-7, 4f, 5f
sliding fi lament theory and  7-8
in women  161, 163
muscle f orce. See force
muscle pr otein synthesis. See protein synthesis
muscle spindles  12-13 , 13f, 376, 566, 642
muscular power . See power
muscular str ength. See strength
musculosk eletal system. See also  bone; muscle
aerobic tr aining and  121
age-related changes in  147-149 , 147f
biomechanics and  27-32
female r esistance tr aining adaptations  160
levers of  28-31 , 28f, 29f, 30f, 31f
muscle anatom y 3-7, 4f, 5f, 6f
muscle contr action  2-3, 5-9, 7f, 9f, 10f, 42-48
skeletal anatom y 2-3, 2f
skeletal gr owth f actors  3
tendon insertion v ariations  31-32 , 32f
myocardium 15
myofibrils 4f, 5-8, 5f, 6f, 11, 100
1846
myofilaments  4f, 5-7, 6f, 100
myogenesis  100
myoglobin  11, 118, 215, 368, 773
myosin 4f, 5-9, 6f, 7f, 41, 42f, 79, 100, 103
myosin A TPase 54, 102, 102f
myotatic r eflex 98
MyPlate  197-198 , 197f, 221-222 t, 223t, 224-225 t, 226t
N
National Col legiate A thletic Association (NCAA)  195, 255, 256, 801, 824
near-equilibrium r eactions  56
nebul in 100
neck str etches  383
needs analysis  145, 529-533 , 532t, 569, 670, 670t, 798
negativ e reinforcement/punishment  174-175
negligence  820, 825-826
nervous system
autonomic  15-16 , 88, 176, 781
central 12, 229, 234, 260, 276, 372-375 , 373t, 641, 651
in chi ldren and adolescents  138, 141
parasympathetic  15-16
peripher al 1, 375
sympathetic  15, 19, 162
testoster one and  85
neuromuscular contr ol 143, 216, 575, 765, 764, 767, 770
neuromuscular junction (NMJ)  3, 9, 98
neuromuscular system
activation of muscles  8-9
aerobic tr aining adaptations  117
age-related changes in  148-149
anaer obic tr aining adaptations  96-99 , 96f
motor uni t recruitment pat terns 11-12 , 12t
muscle fiber t ypes 9-11, 10f, 11t
proprioception  12-14 , 13f, 119, 149, 181, 479, 763
neutral grip  412
nonessential amino acids  200, 200t, 269
nonfunctional o verreaching (NFOR)  527, 782-783 , 782f, 783f
nonlinear periodization model  734
nontraditional implement ex ercises
gener al guidel ines f or 477-478
kettlebel l training  493-494 , 493f, 494f, 520
landmine ex ercises 494, 517-519
sled tr aining  494-495 , 512-514
strongman tr aining  488-493 , 505-514
Nordic hamstring test  307, 307f, 345t
norepinephrine  19, 77t, 81-82 , 88, 89
1847
NSCA Str ength and Condi tioning Pr ofessional Standar ds and Guidel ines 800, 821, 824, 827,
830, 831
nutrient densi ty 216
nutrition 195-250 . See also  fluid intak e; macronutrients ; micronutrients
for altering body composi tion 243-246
for chi ldren and adolescents  201, 215-216 , 239, 241
Dietary R eference I ntakes 198-199 , 201
electr olytes  198, 213, 217-219 , 229, 235, 236
during ev ent 232, 234-236
facility spaces dedicated to  806
feeding and eating disor ders 196, 227, 246-250
MyPlate guidance  197-198 , 197f, 221-222 t, 223t, 224-225 t, 226t
for older adul ts 153, 206
Performance Enhancing Plate guidel ines 197-198
for perf ormance goals  239-240
postcompeti tion 236-239
precompeti tion 228-232 , 230t, 233t
role of sports nutri tion pr ofessionals  195-197
websi tes related to  199
nutritional muscle buf fers 272-273
nutritionists  196-197 , 244, 757, 830
O
obesity 142, 206, 216, 245-246 , 246t, 248
observ ational pr actice  191
off-season  704-706 , 705t, 732-735 , 733f, 737-741
older adul ts 146-153
aerobic tr aining f or 149
dehydration risk among  216
detraining ef fects in  150
injuries among  147, 151
as masters athletes  146, 575
musculosk eletal changes in  147-149 , 147f
neuromuscular changes in  148-149
nutrition consider ations  153, 206
plyometric tr aining f or 152, 575
resistance tr aining f or 148t, 149-153
omega-3 and omega-6 f atty acids  208
onset of blood lactate ac cumulation (OBL A) 60-61 , 61f, 118
open kinetic chain ex ercises 766-767 , 767f
orientation meetings  830
osteoarthri tis 119, 245, 266
osteoblasts  103-104 , 104f, 136
osteogenesis  105, 160
osteogenic stimul i 105, 106, 119
osteopenia  147, 215
1848
osteopor osis 45, 105, 143, 147, 147f, 150-151 , 215
outdoor tr aining spaces  802
out-of-the-r ack ex ercises 414
overhand grip  411, 412f
overhead squats  300, 331, 331f
overload
coordinativ e 651
eccentric  486, 487
mechanotr ansduction and  765
progressive 3, 98, 99, 106, 140, 149, 158, 163, 526-527 , 573
specificity of tr aining and  693-694
overreaching
assessment of  787-790 , 791t
defini tion of  782
factors contributing to  783-785
functional  701, 782, 782f, 783f
gener al adaptation syndr ome and  778, 778f
nonfunctional  527, 782-783 , 782f, 783f
performance-r elated v ariables af fected b y 786, 788t
physiological mechanisms associated wi th 787
recovery methods and str ategies  791-792 , 792t
shared properties wi th other condi tions 783
training continuum r esulting in  780f, 783, 783f
underperf ormance and  785
over-the-f ace barbel l exercises 414
overtraining and o vertraining syndr ome 777-795
assessment of  787-790 , 790f, 791t, 794
concurr ent tr aining and  72
defini tion of  777, 779-781 , 780f
factors contributing to  783-785 , 784f, 785f, 793f, 795f
gener al adaptation syndr ome and  778, 778f, 779
hormonal r esponses to  79, 88
performance-r elated v ariables af fected b y 786, 787f, 788t
physiological mechanisms associated wi th 787, 789t, 794, 794f
recovery methods and str ategies  791-792 , 792t
shared properties wi th other condi tions 783
sympathetic vs. par asympathetic  781
terminology used f or 781, 781f
training continuum r esulting in  778, 780f, 783, 783f
underperf ormance and  785-786 , 785f, 786f
overuse injuries  51, 136, 143, 158, 760
overweight  142, 245-246 , 246t
oxidativ e metabol ism 62, 72, 93, 118, 703
oxidativ e phosphorylation  59, 62-63
oxidativ e system  54, 61-65 , 64t, 65t, 93, 94-95 t
oxygen defici t 68-69 , 68f, 69f
1849
oxygen uptak e (V̇O2). See also  maximal o xygen uptak e
aerobic tr aining and  20-21 , 117, 121, 122, 124, 694-695
bioener getics and  68-72 , 68f, 69f
defini tion of  20, 68
environmental f actors and  124, 125, 289
heart r ate and  698, 698t
peak 71, 140
smoking and  129
P
pace/tempo tr aining  702t, 703
parallel elastic component (PEC)  566, 567f
parallel training models  726, 727f
partial curl-ups  318, 318f, 350t
partner -assisted r eps 414
part vs. whole pr actice  189-190
patellofemoral pain syndr ome (PFPS)  158
peak bone mass  106, 216
peak height v elocity (PHV)  136, 138
peaking pr ograms 730t, 731-732
pelvic floor dysf unction (PFD)  159-160
pennation angle  40-41 , 103
peptides  262-265 , 264t
percent change  335
percentile rank 336
perception– action coupl ing 638
perceptual-cogni tive ability 638, 641, 643, 654-656 , 663, 664t, 670
performance coaches/consul tants 183
Performance Enhancing Plate  197-198
performance-enhancing substances  253-280
banned  253-257 , 264t, 832
dietary supplements used as  253, 269-279
drug testing f or 260, 266, 276
hormones used as  254-269
stacking r egimens  257-258 , 278
performance stagnation  782
performance teams  820-824 , 821t, 824f
performance vs. learning  189
perim ysium  3, 4f
periodization  721-752
annual tr aining plans and  727, 728t, 734-752 , 735f
competi tive period  729f, 730t, 731-732
defini tion of  665, 721
first tr ansition period  729f, 730t, 731
fitness–f atigue par adigm and  724-725 , 725f
gener al adaptation syndr ome and  723, 724f, 778
1850
models of  721, 726-727 , 727f, 729, 729f
monitoring and pr ogramming in r elation to  721-722 , 722f
planning and pr ogramming in r elation to  726, 726t
preparatory period  729-731 , 729f, 730t
second tr ansition period  729f, 730t, 732
sport seasons appl ied to  732-733 , 733f
stimulus–f atigue–r ecovery–adaptation theory and  723-724 , 725f
undulating vs. l inear models of  733-734
phagocytosis  760
phosphagen depletion and r epletion  65-66
phosphagen system  54-56 , 64, 64t, 65t, 93-94 , 94-95 t
phosphocr eatine (PCr)  55, 71, 72, 274, 296
phosphof ructokinase (PFK)  57f, 60
phosphorylation  59-60 , 62-63
physical ther apists (ph ysiother apists)  160, 480, 756, 761, 763
physiological analysis  529, 531, 533, 550
physiological dead space  21, 22f
physiological ef ficiency  167-168
pica 215, 249
plastici ty 134, 138, 375
plyometric tr aining  565-635 . See also  plyometric tr aining pr ogram design
aerobic tr aining wi th 576
defini tion of  565
endur ance tr aining wi th 72
equipment and f acilities for 580
landing technique f or 577-578 , 577f
lower body ply ometrics  569-570 , 570t, 572t, 583-621
mechanical model of  566
neurophysiological model of  566
pretraining ev aluations  577-580
resistance tr aining wi th 72, 576, 576t
safety consider ations  576-580 , 577f
stretch-shortening cy cle and  566-569 , 567f, 568t
trunk ply ometrics  570, 571t, 633-635
upper body ply ometrics  570, 571t, 622-635
plyometric tr aining pr ogram design  569-575
age consider ations  152, 575
frequency of tr aining  572-573
intensi ty of tr aining  571-572 , 572f, 572t
length of pr ogram 574
mode of tr aining  569-570
needs analysis and  569
progression of tr aining  573-574
recovery periods and  573
steps f or implementing  574
volume of tr aining  573, 573t
1851
warm-ups  574, 574t
pogo jumps  578, 583
policies, defined  821
polypeptide hormones  79-81 , 81f
polysac charides  202, 204
polyunsatur ated f ats 198, 207-208
positive reinforcement/punishment  174-175
postactiv ation perf ormance enhancement (P APE) 372-373
postcompeti tion nutri tion 236-239
postseason  705t, 708, 733, 733f, 736
posttests 283, 285, 286
potassium  199, 213, 218, 219, 229, 232
power
age-related changes in  148-150
anaer obic 69, 71, 296-297 , 305-315
biomechanics of  37-40
in chi ldren and adolescents  140-141
critical 118, 267, 695
defini tion of  37, 38, 566
peak 38, 112-113 , 150, 277, 297, 484, 552-553 , 695
positive and negativ e 36-38
strength and power sports  72, 235, 238-239
strength/power phase of periodization  730t, 731
strength vs.  39-40
power clean  308, 339t, 340t, 341t, 342-343 t
power ex ercises 414-415 , 463-474 , 534, 534f, 541
power str oke 7, 8
practice schedules  189-191
precompeti tion nutri tion 228-232 , 230t, 233t
predesign phase f or new f acilities 798, 798f
predictiv e validity 284
pregnancy  47, 156, 157t, 201, 215, 217
preoper ation phase f or new f acilities 798f, 799
preparatory period of periodization  729-731 , 729f, 730t
preparticipation scr eenings  144, 151, 577-580 , 826-827
preseason  705t, 707, 733, 733f, 735, 742-747
pretests  283, 285, 286, 292, 337
prework out ener gy drinks  277-279
pro agility test  298, 326, 326f, 361t
procedur es, defined  819
procollagen  106-107
product l iability 828-829
progester one 77t, 79, 162, 163f
program design. See also  aerobic tr aining pr ogram design ; plyometric tr aining pr ogram
design ; resistance tr aining pr ogram design
limiting factors f or 778, 779f
1852
for rehabi litation and r econdi tioning  767-770 , 768t, 769t
for speed and agi lity training  665
progressive muscular r elaxation (PMR)  177
progressive-part tr aining  190
prohormones  261-262
pronated grip  411, 412f
proprioception  12-14 , 13f, 119, 149, 181, 479, 765
proprioceptiv e neur omuscular f acilitation (PNF)  378-381 , 378f, 379f, 380f, 407-409
proprioceptors  12-14 , 13f, 376, 378
proteins. See also  amino acids ; protein synthesis
binding  78, 82-84 , 87-88 , 274
in common f oods 202, 203-204 t
contractile 13f, 79, 80, 100, 101, 120
degradation of  79, 88, 101, 202, 229
dietary r ecommendations  200-202
digestibi lity of 200
during-ev ent nutri tion and  232, 234
as ener gy sour ce 53, 54
guidel ines f or 210
oxidation of  61, 63, 64f
postcompeti tion nutri tion and  237-239
postex ercise intak e of 120, 202
precompeti tion nutri tion and  228
preexercise intak e of 85, 109, 202
sport-speci fic needs  241, 241-242 t
structur al 79, 80, 83, 100
protein synthesis
amino acids and  269-270 , 270f
anabol ic ster oids and  255, 259
caloric intak e and  241, 244
fractional synthetic r ate and  237, 238
hormones and  76, 79-80 , 82-83 , 86-88 , 90, 120, 156, 265
resistance tr aining and  100-102 , 202, 238-239
ribosomes in f acilitation of  3
vitamin D and  213
proteolytic enzymes  88
proximate cause  825
psychiatrists  757
psychological ef ficiency  170
psychologists  183-184 , 757
psychology . See sport psy chology
pubert y 84, 134, 136-138 , 141, 144, 156, 158, 266
pull drills 571t
pulmonary v alve 14, 15f
pure-part tr aining  190
Purkinje fibers  14, 15f
1853
push dri lls 571t
push–pul l exercises 538, 538t, 541
push-ups  319-320 , 319f, 320f, 350t, 351t, 631-632
P-wave 16, 16f
pyruvate 56-60 , 57f, 62-63 , 63t, 65, 118
Q
QRS complex  16, 16f
quadriceps str etches  409
quanti tative computed tomogr aphy (QCT ) 105
R
raise, activ ate and mobi lize, and potentiate (RAMP) pr otocol  369-372 , 371t
random pr actice  190-191
range (statistic)  335
range of motion (ROM). See also  flexibi lity
inertia and  46
joint t ypes and  2, 3, 50, 375
mechanical adv antage and  30
pennation angle and  103
in rehabi litation and r econdi tioning  761, 764, 770
resistance tr aining and  119, 413
static vs. dynamic  374
tendon insertion and  31-32
torque and  39, 41, 45
rate coding  40, 113, 372, 651, 665
rate-limiting step  60
rate of f orce dev elopment (RFD)  638-641 , 639f, 651
rate–pr essure product  20, 110
ratings of per ceived ex ertion (RPE)  548-549 , 699, 700t
reaction time  148, 156, 175, 180, 268, 368, 643, 656, 731
reactiv e hyperemia 24
reactiv e strength index  141, 312, 313, 530-531
rebound ex ercises 565, 572
rebound jumps  313, 348t
reciprocal inhibi tion 378
Recommended Dietary Al lowance (RDA)  199, 201-202
record keeping  827-828 , 830-831
red blood cel ls 17, 23, 104, 124, 127, 130, 215, 266-267 , 773
rehabi litation and r econdi tioning  755-772
allied heal th teams and  755-757 , 763, 764, 768, 770
goals and ex ercise str ategies  761-767
indications and contr aindications f or treatment  757, 758f
injury and r einjury risk r eduction  770, 771f, 772f
injury t ypes in need of  757-758
principles and guidel ines 756
1854
program design  767-770 , 768t, 769t
summary f orms in  757, 759t
tissue heal ing 759-761 , 760t
relative ener gy deficiency in sport (RED- S) 120, 158, 246-247 , 783
relaxation techniques  176-178
release agr eements  827, 828f
reliability 284-286 , 288, 291, 292, 300-302 , 337
repetitions 543-557 , 544t, 546f, 547-548 t, 549t, 550f, 551f, 552t, 554t
repetition-volume  543, 556
repetitive part tr aining  190
resistance band ex ercises 484-485 , 484t, 485f, 515
resistance tr aining. See also  alternativ e modes of ex ercise; free weight ex ercises;
nontraditional implement ex ercises; resistance tr aining pr ogram design
abdominal ex ercises 418-419
back ex ercises 420-425
bicep ex ercises 426-427
bioener getics and  56, 58, 64, 66, 67, 71-72
biomechanics of  27-51
body and l imb posi tioning f or 412-413
bone changes and  3, 82, 105-106
breathing consider ations f or 413, 478
calf exercises 428-429
chest ex ercises 430-435
for chi ldren and adolescents  134, 137, 139-146 , 142f, 146f
endocrine r esponses to  75-91 , 109, 161-163
endur ance tr aining wi th 67, 72, 111-113 , 119, 709-711
exercise technique  411-413
flexibi lity and  375-376
forearm ex ercises 436-437
handgrips f or 411-412 , 412f
hip and thigh ex ercises 438-456
injury concerns in  48-51
muscles of r espiration and  18
for older adul ts 148t, 149-153
physiological adaptations to  94t, 96-131 , 116t
plyometric tr aining wi th 72, 576, 576t
power ex ercises 414-415 , 463-474
range of motion and speed in  119, 413
for rehabi litation and r econdi tioning  767-768 , 768t, 769t
shoulder ex ercises 457-460
sources of r esistance  43-48
speed dev elopment and  651, 652-653 t
tricep ex ercises 461-462
unilateral training  495
weight bel ts for 49-50 , 413
for women  84-89 , 85f, 87f, 155, 156, 160-164
1855
resistance tr aining pr ogram design  525-563
anaer obic ex ercise pr escription principles and  525-528
for chi ldren and adolescents  144-146 , 146f
exercise or der 540-542
exercise selection  528f, 532-537 , 536f
frequency of tr aining  536, 538-540 , 538t, 539t
needs analysis and  529-533
for older adul ts 150-153
overview of v ariables  563
rest periods  560-562 , 561t
training load and r epetitions 543-557
volume of tr aining  556-560 , 558t, 559t
resistance tr aining ski lls bat tery (R TSB) 300
respiratory system  1, 17-19 , 18f, 21-24 , 22f, 117, 121
restoration period  730t, 732
rest periods  560-562 , 561t
reversal theory  173
reversibility principle  113, 131, 527
rhabdom yolysis  216, 773-774
risk management  825
rowing machines  716
rumination disor der 249
running ex ercises 719
running speed. See sprinting
S
safety cushion  806, 807-808 t
sagittal plane  32, 33f, 34-35 f
sandbag carries  492, 509
sarcolemma  3, 4f, 5f, 9, 56
sarcomer es 5-8, 6f, 7f, 40-41 , 101
sarcopenia  148-150 , 575
sarcoplasm  3-5, 4f, 41, 54, 56, 60, 80
sarcoplasmic r eticulum  3, 5f, 7-9, 54, 67, 101, 103, 277
satellite training f acilities 800
saturated f ats 198, 207, 208
scope of pr actice  827
secondary messengers  79-82
second-class lev ers 29, 29f
second tr ansition period of periodization  729f, 730t, 732
segmentation  190
selectiv e andr ogen r eceptor modulators (S ARMs)  262-265 , 263t, 264f
selectiv e attention  175
self-confidence  137, 148, 169, 171, 178, 181
self-contr olled pr actice  174
self-efficacy  175, 178-180 , 189
1856
self-talk 168, 171, 179, 181, 183
sequential tr aining models  726, 727f
series elastic component (SEC)  566, 567f
set-repetition best (SRB)  549-550 , 549t
sets, defined  556
sex hormones  84, 162, 208, 255, 257
shoulder ex ercises 457-460
shoulder injuries  50
shoulder str etches  384, 409
sickle cel l trait (SCT ) 216, 772-773
side-shuf fle 657-658 , 659-660 f
simplification  190
single-joint ex ercises 532, 539, 541, 710, 763, 764
sinoatrial (S A) node  14-16 , 15f, 117
sit-and-r each test  330, 330f, 354t, 355t
size principle  78, 97, 97f
skeletal age assessment  136
skeletal muscle pump  17, 19
skeletal system. See musculosk eletal system
skinfold measur ements  300-301 , 332, 333f, 364t
slams  570, 571t
sled tr aining  494-495 , 512-514
sleep lev els 159
sliding fi lament theory  7-8, 7f
slow (aer obic) gly colysis  56, 64t, 65t
slow-twitch muscle fibers. See type I muscle fibers
smallest worth while change  337
smoking  129-130
snatch grip  412
sodium  198, 213, 218, 219, 229, 232, 236
sodium bicarbonate  273, 279
sodium ci trate 273, 279
sodium-potassium A TPase 54, 103
somatic age assessment  136
somatic anxiet y 169, 170, 173
specific adaptation to imposed demands (S AID) principle  526, 535, 768
specific preparatory phase of periodization  729-730 , 730t
speed. See also  sprinting
defini tion of  298, 637
development of  651-653 , 652-653 t, 665-668 , 666-667 t, 669t
mechanics of  638-641
neurophysiological basis f or 641-643 , 642f, 643f
sprint  122, 141, 284, 288, 291, 643-645 , 651, 653, 709
tests of  288t, 298-299 , 327, 362-363 t
training pr ogram design  665
speed dri lls 675-684
1857
split routines  538, 539t
sport drinks  202, 218, 219, 229, 232, 234, 236, 240
sport psy chology  167-192
defini tion and r ole of  167, 168
energy management and  169-170
focus/at tention and  168-171 , 173-177 , 176f, 179-183 , 190-191
ideal perf ormance state and  167-169
mental heal th and  158, 159, 168, 182-185 , 215, 792
motiv ation and  169, 173-175 , 179, 180, 183-186 , 189-190
motor ski ll acquisi tion/learning and  189-192
psychological impact of injuries  185-189 , 186f, 187f
techniques f or impr oved perf ormance  176-181
theoretical tenants and perf ormance  171-173
sport seasons
aerobic tr aining pr ogram design and  704-708 , 705t
frequency of tr aining based on  539, 539t
periodization appl ied to  732-733 , 733f
training priori ties b y 531-532 , 532t
spotting free weight ex ercises 414-416 , 415f, 831
sprains 757-758
spring–mass model (SMM)  641-642 , 642f
sprinting
defini tion of  637
indoor tr ack and turf lanes  806-807
monitoring sprint abi lity 667-668 , 669t
physics of  638-641
repeated sprint -sequence interv al session  122
short to long method of tr aining  665-667 , 666-667 t
speed and  122, 141, 284, 288, 291, 643-645 , 651, 653, 709
stance phase of  639, 642-648 , 642f, 643f, 657
step length–f requency inter action in  643, 644f
technical err ors and coaching  646, 648, 649-650 t
technique guidel ines 645-646 , 645f, 646f, 647-648 f, 649f
training goals  648, 651
squat jumps  311, 311f, 584, 587-588
squats  300, 305, 331, 331f, 339t, 340t, 341t, 342-343 t, 344t, 579
stability
cardiovascular  127, 711
core 479-481
defini tion of  300
of joints  50, 99, 763, 766
postur al 148, 151
proprioception and  763
tests f or 287t, 328-329
stair steppers  717
standar d deviation  335-336
1858
standar d of car e 820, 824-826
standing jumps  308, 344t, 345t, 591-593
star ex cursion balance test (SEB T) 300, 329, 329f, 352t, 353t
state anxiet y 169-171 , 170f, 186
static v ertical jump  311, 311f, 346-348 t
stationary bik es 715
statistical ev aluation of test data  335-337 , 336f
statute of l imitations  830
steroid hormones  76, 78-80 , 81f
sticking point  43, 413, 478
stimulants  276-279
stimulus–f atigue–r ecovery–adaptation theory  723-724 , 725f
straight-line sprint tests  327
strains 758
strength
age-related changes in  148-150
anabol ic ster oids and  259-260
biomechanics of  36, 39-43 , 41f, 42f
in chi ldren and adolescents  138-141 , 142f
defini tion of  36
high-speed  296-297 , 305-315
low-speed  295-296 , 304-305
nutrition for 240
plyometric tr aining and  578-579 , 578f, 579f
power vs.  39-40
testing of  36, 151, 295-297 , 304-305
strength and power sports  72, 235, 238-239
strength–endur ance phase of periodization  730-731 , 730t
strength/power phase of periodization  730t, 731
strength-to-mass r atio 43
strength tr aining. See resistance tr aining
stress 169-171 , 176-177 , 181-184 , 182t, 186-188 , 186f
stress fractures 106, 158, 213, 760
stress management  176, 177, 181, 186, 247
stretching  376-409 . See also  flexibi lity
active 376
ballistic 300, 377
dynamic  369, 377-378 , 395-406 , 765
facility spaces f or 805
injury risk r eduction and  770, 771f
passiv e 375, 376, 378-379 , 379f, 380f, 773
PNF 378-381 , 378f, 379f, 380f, 407-409
programming consider ations f or 381
static 300, 369, 370, 376-377 , 381-394
stretch r eflex 148, 376, 377, 565, 566, 568-570 , 580
stretch-shortening cy cle (S SC) 141, 152, 566-569 , 567f, 568t, 641-643 , 648, 651, 709
1859
stretch toler ance 375
strongman tr aining  488-493 , 505-514
structur al exercises 45, 105, 413, 478, 534, 561
student intern ev aluation f orms 823, 823f
subluxations  757
substr ate-lev el phosphorylation  59-60 , 62, 63
sucrose 202, 204, 234, 236, 239
super compensation  103, 723, 733, 734, 782-783
supersets  541-542
supervision  144, 580, 802, 831
supinated grip  412, 412f
supine ex ercises 412
supplements. See dietary supplements
surface dr ag 47
suspension tr aining  479, 807
sweat r ate 125, 127, 217-219 , 234, 236, 290, 711-712
SWOT analysis  798
synephrine  279
syner gists 28, 100
synovial fluid  2, 108-109
systematic desensi tization (SD)  177-178
systol ic blood pr essure 20-21 , 110, 151, 267, 279
T
Tabata tr aining  704
tachycardia 16, 169
talent identi fication  282, 299
tapering  121, 131, 231, 709, 784
team ph ysicians  196, 756, 761, 763
technical competence  137, 139, 144-146 , 151, 575, 580, 661
tendini tis 50, 758
tendinopath y 758-759
tendons  3, 4f, 28, 31-32 , 32f, 50-51 , 106-108 , 119, 665, 758-759
testoster one
aerobic tr aining and  120
anabol ic ster oids and  101, 109, 255-262 , 258t, 260f
anaer obic tr aining and  109
catecholamines and  89
in chi ldren and adolescents  141, 156
IGF synthesis and  87
performance enhancement and  254-262
physiological actions of  77t, 78-80 , 81f, 83-84
precursors (pr ohormones)  261-262
resistance tr aining and  76, 82, 84-85 , 85f, 90, 161-162
test–retest r eliability 284
tests and testing  281-366 . See also speci fic types of tests
1860
administr ation of  289-292
AI for analysis of data f rom 301
of athletic perf ormance par ameters  295-334
batteries and mul tiple testing trials  291
defini tion of  283
environmental f actors and  289-290 , 290f
equipment f or 301, 302
evidence-based  282
format and sequence of  291-292
health and saf ety consider ations  289-290
preparation of athletes f or 292
protocols and pr ocedur es for 301-302
reasons f or testing  281-283
recording/scoring f orms 291
reliability of 284-286 , 288, 291, 292, 300-302 , 337
scienti fic process of  285, 285f
selection of  286-289 , 287-288 t
statistical ev aluation of data f rom 335-337 , 336f, 339-366
terminology r elated to  283
tester selection and tr aining  291
validity of 283-284 , 286, 288-291 , 296, 300-302 , 337
tetanic contr actions  9, 9f
thermogenesis  243, 267, 774
thigh ex ercises 438-456
thigh str etches  391-392
third-class lev ers 29, 30f
throws 570, 571t, 573, 622-630
thyroid hormones  76, 78, 79, 87, 90-91 , 261
tire flipping  490-491 , 505
tissue heal ing 758-761 , 760t
titin 41, 42f, 79, 100
Tolerable Upper I ntake Lev el (UL)  199
torque 28-29 , 31, 31f, 32f, 38-39 , 41-45 , 48-50 , 158, 479
torso str etches  389
trabecular bone  104, 105
traditional periodization model  736
training age  137
training and ex ercise. See also  aerobic tr aining ; anaer obic tr aining ; detraining ; endur ance
training ; overtraining and o vertraining syndr ome; periodization ; plyometric tr aining ;
resistance tr aining
circuit training  541, 805-807
combination tr aining  71-72
complex tr aining  576
concurr ent 71-72 , 111-113 , 119, 239, 495, 536, 694, 709-711
cross-tr aining  33, 71, 696, 708, 709
duration of  64-65 , 64t, 701
1861
frequency of  536, 538-540 , 538t, 539t, 572-573 , 696-697
individual ization of  527-528
intensi ty of 64-65 , 64t, 122, 543, 571-572 , 572f, 572t, 697-701 , 697t, 701f, 784, 784f
interv al training  69-71 , 70t, 121, 695, 702t, 703-704
mode of ex ercise 696
progression of  526-527 , 573-574 , 701-702
specificity of 53, 69-72 , 70t, 525-527 , 535, 693-694
tapering  121, 131, 231, 709, 786
volume of  526, 526f, 556-560 , 558t, 559t, 573, 573t, 784, 784f
training car ds/sheets  832
training loads
accommodation to  99
calculation of  552
coefficient of v ariation f or 784
exercise type and  539-540
fitness–f atigue par adigm and  724
mispr ogramming of  297
periodization and  726, 727, 731-735
pregnancy and  156
progression of  554, 554t
quanti fication of  38
repetitions and  543-557 , 544t, 546f, 547-548 t, 549t, 550f, 551f, 552t, 554t
resistance band ex ercises and  484
variation of  553-554
training status  529-530 , 530t, 538, 538t, 558
trait anxiet y 169-170 , 170f, 186
transverse plane  32, 33f, 34-35 f
treadmi lls 98, 151, 229, 231-232 , 289, 493, 700, 714, 803, 805-806
triceps ex ercises 461-462
tricuspid v alve 14, 15f
triglycerides  63, 118, 205, 206, 208, 245, 263
trunk ply ometrics  570, 571t, 633-635
T-test 298, 324, 324f, 656
T-tubules  5f, 9, 101, 103
tuck jump assessment ( TJA) 299, 300
T-wave 16, 16f
twitch 9, 9f
type I (slow -twitch) muscle fibers
aerobic tr aining adaptations  118
anaer obic tr aining adaptations  102-103
bioener getics and  56, 58, 66
characteristics of  9-11, 10f, 11t
detraining ef fects on  113
endur ance tr aining and  84
involvement in sport ev ents 12, 12t
type II (f ast-twitch) muscle fibers
1862
aerobic tr aining adaptations  118
age-related changes in  148
anaer obic tr aining adaptations  102-103 , 102f
bioener getics and  56, 58, 61, 66
characteristics of  9-11, 10f, 11t
detraining ef fects on  113
involvement in sport ev ents 12, 12t
typical err or of measur ement ( TE) 284-285
U
underhand grip  412, 412f
underperf ormance  785-786 , 785f, 786f, 787f
undulating periodization model  734
unilateral carries  492-493
unilateral training  495
unloading week  732, 735
unsatur ated f ats 198, 207-208
upper arm str etches  385, 386
upper back str etches  385
upper body ply ometrics  570, 571t, 622-635
urinary incontinence (UI)  160
urine speci fic gravity (USG)  217, 218, 229
V
validity 283-284 , 286, 288-291 , 296, 300-302 , 337
Valsalv a maneuv er 18, 23, 49, 151, 413, 478
vaping  129-130
variabi lity measur es 335-336 , 336f
variable pr actice  191
variable-r esistance tr aining methods  481-488
vegetarians and v egans  200
veins and v enules  16f, 17
velocity
acceleration and  36, 37, 638, 639
angular  39, 42-43 , 42f, 45
force–velocity relationship  32, 42f, 46, 552, 566, 656, 661
load– velocity profiles 297, 298f, 661
maximum  495, 644-648 , 646f, 647-648 f, 650t, 651
peak height  136, 138
velocity-based testing (VB T) 315, 349t
venous system  16, 16f, 17
ventilatory equiv alent 21, 24
vertebr al column  2, 3, 48, 49
vertical jumps  308-311 , 309f, 310f, 311f, 344t, 346-348 t, 591
very low -densi ty lipoproteins (VLDL)  208
vitamins  198, 199, 208, 210-213 , 211-212 t
1863
V̇O2. See oxygen uptak e
V̇O2max. See maximal o xygen uptak e
volume–load  538, 543, 554, 556, 559, 561, 665, 734, 736, 832
W
walking ex ercises 719
warm-ups  300, 367-374 , 371t, 373t, 574, 574t, 805
weight bel ts 49-50 , 413
weighted carries  491-493
weight gain or loss  243-246
weight -stack machines  44-45 , 45f
wet muscle  58
whole vs. part pr actice  189-190
women
discrimination pr otections f or 826
eating disor ders among  247-249
flexibi lity among  375
heat ac climatization and  127
hemoglobin content in  23
injury and heal th consider ations f or 156, 158-160
iron deficiency among  199, 215
menstrual cy cle and  86, 161-164 , 163f, 215
physical changes in early adul thood  155-156
precompeti tion nutri tion for 229, 231
pregnancy and  47, 156, 157t, 201, 215, 217
resistance tr aining f or 84-89 , 85f, 87f, 155, 156, 160-164
test selection f or 289
work 36-39 , 543
work-to-rest ratios 70, 573, 665, 703-704 , 826
World Anti-Doping Agency (W ADA) 255, 263, 264t
wrist injuries  51
Y
YMCA bench pr ess test  321, 352t
yoke walk 492, 508
youth. See children and adolescents
youth ph ysical dev elopment (YPD) model  134, 135f
Yo-Yo intermi ttent r ecovery test  298, 322, 322f, 358t
Z
z score 336, 336f
1864
1865
ABOUT THE EDITORS
G. Gregory Haff, PhD, CSCS,*D, FNSCA,  is a professor of
strength and condi tioning based in Australia. He has published more
than 280 articles, centering his resear ch on performance effects in
the areas of strength-tr aining methodologies, performance testing,
training theory , and nutritional supplementation. Haff is a past
president of the National Strength and Condi tioning Association
(NSCA) and a senior associate editor for the Journal of Strength and
Condi tioning Resear ch. In 2021 he received the NSCA Impact Award
for his significant contributions to the strength and condi tioning
profession. Additional ly, in 2014 he was the United Kingdom
Strength and Condi tioning Association (UKSCA) Strength and
Condi tioning Coach of the Year for Education and Resear ch and the
1866
2011 NSCA William J. Kraemer Outstanding Sport Scientist Award
winner . He is a certified strength and condi tioning special ist with
distinction (CSCS ,*D), a UKSCA -accredited strength and condi tioning
coach (ASCC), and an accredited Australian Strength and
Condi tioning Association level 2 strength and condi tioning coach.
Additional ly, Haff is a national-lev el weightl ifting coach in the United
States and Australia. He serves as a consul tant for numer ous
sporting bodies, including teams in the Australian Footbal l League,
Australian Rugby Union, Australian Basketball Association, and
National F ootbal l League.
N. Travis Triplett, PhD, CSCS,*D, FNSCA,  is a professor and
program director in the department of kinesiology at Appalachian
State University in Boone, North Carolina. She is a past president of
the National Strength and Condi tioning Association (NSCA) and is
the current vice chair of the board of directors for the NSCA ’s Counci l
on Accreditation of Strength and Condi tioning Education  (CASCE).
She was the 2025 winner of the Boyd Epley Award for NSCA Lifetime
Contributions as well as the 2010 NSCA William J. Kraemer
1867
Outstanding Sport Scientist award winner . She has served on two
panels for NASA, one for developing resistance exercise
countermeasur es to microgravity environments for the International
Space Station, and was a sports physiology resear ch assistant at the
U.S. Olympic Training Center in Colorado Springs, Colorado. Dr.
Triplett is a certified strength and condi tioning special ist with
distinction as wel l as a US A Weightl ifting club coach.
1868
1869
CONTRIBUTORS
Shawn M. Ar ent, PhD , CSCS ,*D, FISSN
Chris A. B ailey, PhD , CSCS ,*D, RSCC*D
Kate Baldwin, PhD
Claire Brady, PhD , CSCS
Clive Brewer, MSc, CSCS ,*D, RSCC*E
Bill I. Campbel l, PhD , CSCS , FISSN
Scott Caul field, MA, CSCS ,*D, TSAC-F,*D, RSCC*D
Dale W . Chapman, PhD , CSCS
Jo Clubb , MS
Sean Col lins, PhD , CSCS ,*D
Paul Comf ort, PhD , CSCS ,*D, FNSCA
Nicole Dabbs, PhD , FNSCA
Glen B . Deakin, PhD
Thomas Dos’ Santos, PhD , CSCS ,*D
Avery Faigenbaum, EdD , CSCS , CPSS, CSPS , TSAC-F, FNSCA
Adam F eit, PhD , CSCS , RSCC*D
Cassandr a Forsythe, PhD , RD
Ryan Fowler, MS, CSCS ,*D, TSAC-F,*D, RSCC*D
Andrew C. Fry , PhD , CSCS ,*D, FNSCA*E
G. Gregory Haf f, PhD , CSCS ,*D, FNSCA
William J. Hanney , DPT, PhD , ATC, CSCS ,*D, NSCA -CPT,*D, FNSCA
Disa L. Hatfield, PhD , CSCS ,*D, FNSCA
David J. Heikkinen, PhD , CSCS
Daniel B . Hollander , EdD , CSCS
1870
Guy Hornsb y, PhD , CSCS ,*D, RSCC*D , FNSCA
Ian Jef freys, PhD , CSCS ,*D, NSCA -CPT,*D, RSCC*E, FNSCA
Nathaniel D .M. Jenkins, PhD , CSCS , NSCA -CPT
William R. Johnson, PhD , CPSS,*D, CSCS ,*D
Paul A Jones, PhD , CSCS
Justin K eogh, PhD
Morey J. Kolber, PhD , PT, CSCS ,*D, TSAC-F,*D, FNSCA
William J. Kraemer , PhD , CSCS ,*D, FNSCA
Jason Lak e, PhD
Rhodri Llo yd, PhD , CSCS ,*D, FNSCA
Eric L. McMahon, MEd, CSCS ,*D, TSAC-F,*D, RSCC*E
John McMahon, PhD , CSCS ,*D
Ryan Metz ger, MS, CSCS , RSCC
Sylvia Moesk ops, PhD , CSCS
Bradley C. Nindl, PhD
Brijesh P atel, MA, CSCS , RSCC*E
Brandon R oberts, PhD , CSCS ,*D, TSAC-F,*D, CISSN
Michael D . Roberts, PhD
Carwyn P .M. Sharp , PhD , CSCS ,*D
Abbie E. Smi th-Ryan, PhD , CSCS ,*D, FISSN, FNSCA
Timoth y J. Suchomel, PhD , CSCS ,*D, CPSS, RSCC*D , FNSCA
N. Travis Triplett, PhD , CSCS ,*D, FNSCA
Jakob Vingr en, PhD , CSCS
Reed W ainwright, JD , CSCS , NSCA -CPT, RSCC*D
1871
1872
CONTRIBUTORS TO
PREVIOUS EDITIONS
William B . Allerhei ligen, MS , CSCS ,*D, NSCA -CPT,*D, FNSCA
Stephanie Armi tage-K err, PhD , CSCS
Thomas R. B aechle, EdD , CSCS ,*D, Retired, NSCA -CPT,*D, Retired
Douglas B erninger , MEd, CSCS ,*D, RSCC
Richar d A. B orden, PhD , PT, CSCS , Retired, FNSCA
Evan B. Brody, PhD
Victor B rown, III, MS , ATC, CSCS , NSCA -CPT
Donald Chu, PhD , PT, ATC, CSCS ,*D, NSCA -CPT,*D, FNSCA
Mike Conley , MD, PhD
Brian Conr oy, MD, PhD , CSCS
Joel T . Cramer, PhD , CSCS ,*D, NSCA -CPT,*D, FNSCA
Jay Dawes, PhD , CSCS ,*D, NSCA -CPT,*D, FNSCA
Brad H. DeW eese, EdD , CSCS , NSCA -CPT, USATF
Andrea DuB ois, MS , HSF
Gary Dudley , PhD , CSCS , FACSM
Roger W . Earle, MA, CSCS ,*D, NSCA -CPT,*D, RSCC*D
Boyd Epley , MEd, CSCS ,*D, RSCC*E, FNSCA
Duncan Fr ench, PhD , CSCS
Karl E. Friedl, PhD
John Garhammer , PhD , CSCS , NSCA -CPT, FNSCA
Lori Gr eenwood, PhD , ATC, LAT
Michael Gr eenwood, PhD , CSCS ,*D, RSCC*D , FACSM, FNSCA
1873
Terry L. Grindstaf f, PhD , PT, ATC, SCS , CSCS
Patrick S . Hagerman, EdD , CSCS , NSCA -CPT, FNSCA
Everett Harman, PhD , CSCS , NSCA -CPT, TSAC-F
Robert T . Harris, PhD
Bradley D . Hatfield, PhD , FACSM
Trent Her da, PhD
Jay R. Hof fman, PhD , CSCS ,*D, RSCC*D , FACSM, FNSCA
William R. Holcomb , PhD , ATC/L, CSCS ,*D, FNSCA
Jean B arrett Holloway, MA, CSCS
Andrea Hudy , MA, CSCS , RSCC*D
Gary R. Hunter , PhD , CSCS , FACSM
Jeffrey McB ride, PhD , CSCS , FNSCA
Michael McGuigan, PhD , CSCS
Sophia Nimphius, PhD , CSCS ,*D
Clay Pandorf , BS
Steven S. Plisk, MS
David Potach, MS , PT, SCS, CSCS ,*D, NSCA -CPT,*D
Jeffrey A. P otteiger , PhD , FACSM
Nicholas A. R atamess, PhD , CSCS ,*D, FNSCA
Kristin R eimers, PhD , RD
Benjamin H. R euter, PhD , ATC, CSCS ,*D
Fred Roll, BS
Jaime R uud, MS , RD
Douglas M. S emenick, EdD
Jeremy Sheppar d, PhD , CSCS ,*D, RSCC*E
Marie Spano , MS, RD, CSCS , CSSD
Barry A. Spiering, PhD , CSCS
Traci Statler , PhD , CSCS , CC-AASP
Michael H. Stone, PhD , FNSCA
1874
Jeffrey R. Stout, PhD , CSCS , FACSM, FNSCA
Ann S wank, PhD , CSCS , FACSM
John T aylor, MS, FNSCA
Dan W athen, MS , ATC, CSCS ,*D, NSCA -CPT,*D, FNSCA
Mark A. Wi lliams, PhD , FACSM
1875
1876