# Section 26.4

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 26: Facility Policies, Procedures, and Legal Issues

**Section:** 26.4 -- Emergency Planning

**PDF Pages:** 1794--1800

immuni ty from being sued in its own courts without its consent and
a state’s immuni ty from being sued in federal court by the state’ s
own citizens (15). A motion for summary judgment was granted in a
case decided in the United States District Court for the Northern
District of Mississippi Oxford Division that ruled on federal and state
claims initiated  against a state university and an emplo yee (i.e.,
head footbal l coach) in both the emplo yee’s official capaci ty (i.e.,
Title VI, Title IX, Americans With Disabi lities Act, Rehabi litation Act,
and state claims of gross negligence and negligence ) and the
emplo yee’s individual capaci ty (i.e., federal equal protection claim
and state intentional infliction of emotional distress claim) (25).
Summary judgments can be dismissed with prejudice, which means
a dismis sal barring the plainti ff from prosecuting any later lawsuit on
the same claim, or without prejudice, which does not bar the plainti ff
from refiling the lawsuit within the applicable limitations period (16).
Case law and litigation directs the strength and condi tioning
professional to consistently demonstr ate a standar d of care that
implements a strength and condi tioning program that is evidence
based and supported by research to avoid an athlete incurring organ
damage f rom ex ertional rhabdom yolysis.
The strength and condi tioning professional shall take health-
related information provided by medical evaluatio ns while
maintaining compl iance with any Health Insurance Portability and
Accountabi lity Act (HIPAA) guidel ines to ensur e that athletes with
significant medical condi tions (e.g., sickle cell trait, prior heat-related
issue, asthma) are prescribed  the proper work-to-rest ratios. Title VI
and Title IX of the Civil Rights of 1964 have been at the forefront of
many claims alleging racial discrimination and sexual discrimination,
respectiv ely. It is essential that the implementation of the overall
strength and condi tioning program and the benefi ts provided to each
team are equal and do not discriminate on the basis of sex. For
example, it is imper ative that workout times, program designs,
equipment availability, technological assessments, evaluations (i.e.,
strength, powe r, body composi tion), and nutritional supplements be
1794
provided to women’ s sports on an equal basis as given to men’s
sports.
Preparticipation Screening and Medical
Clearance
Before an athlete is allowed access to the strength and conditioning
facility, preparticipation screening and clearance in accordance with
relevant governing bodies (e.g., NCAA, institution sports medicine
staff, and high school athletic associations) are required. This
requirement is establ ished under Section 1 of NSCA Strength and
Condi tioning Professional Standards and Guidel ines (30). Standar d
1.1 “requires participants to under go health care provider screening
and clearance before participation. ” The strength and conditioning
professional does not need an actual copy of the physical
examination but should require a signed statement to show proof of
medical clearance to participate. Athletes who are returning from an
injury or illness or who have special needs (e.g., diabetes, asthma,
epilepsy, hypertension) should also be required to show proof of
medical clearance before beginning or returning to a strength and
condi tioning pr ogram.
Procedur es should therefore be in place to ensur e that
documentation confirming that each athlete was screened and
cleared to participate by the sports medicine staff is on record in the
main office of the strength and condi tioning program before athletes
are allowed to participate. Note, howev er, that it is the responsibi lity
of the sports medicine staff (e.g., the team or program’s certified
athletic trainer, physician, or physical therapist) to allow an athlete to
begin formal involvement in the strength and condi tioning program.
In the case of a school location, this applies to both athletes who are
new to the school or program and athletes who are just recovering
from an injury or illness. This stipulation is important because it is
not in the strength and condi tioning professional’ s scope of
practice  (i.e., proper legal parameters and professional duties) to
diagnose or evaluate an individual’ s medical or health condi tion.
1795
Therefore, only the sports medicine staff can provide medical
clearance (and proof thereof) and answer any questions about
participation. The strength and condi tioning professional should
collaborate with the medical staff and sports medicine personnel so
that workouts can be modified (e.g., work-to-rest ratio) to ensur e
the health and safety of any athlete diagnosed with a medical
condi tion or disease (e.g., sickle cell trait, prior heat-related issue,
asthma).
Eligibility Criteria
To focus the attention and efforts of the strength and condi tioning
staff on a target training population, certain eligibility requirements
should be establ ished. The following is a list of typical individuals or
groups who are allowed to use the strength and condi tioning facility
at an insti tution:
Full- or part-time student -athletes participating in an athletic
department –sponsor ed sport
Newly incomin g and just-transferred student -athletes who
have register ed for school and have confirmation of team
status as designated b y the head sport coach
Students in ph ysical education classes
All athletic department coaching and administr ative staf f
All sports medicine department staf f
Alumni athlete s who participated in an athletic departm ent–
sponsor ed sport and completed their el igibility
Individuals and groups approved by the athletic director or
director of str ength and condi tioning
Other individuals or groups may request access to the strength
and condi tioning facility. These persons or groups must receive prior
approval by the athletic director or director of strength and
condi tioning and should have a prearranged schedule that specifies
when they will use the facility so proper supervision can be provided.
To be consistent and objectiv e, it is advantageous to have a policy in
1796
place to refer to rather than having to decide on this on a case-b y-
case basis. This policy is especial ly important as it relates to the
facility fee, if any. The following are examples of common criteria by
which to determine whether outside organizations can use a
strength and condi tioning f acility:
Use must be pr eappr oved by the athletic dir ector.
Use must be preappr oved by the strength and condi tioning
director.
The program or session must be supervised by strength and
condi tioning department staf f.
The program or session must be scheduled during off-hours
when athletes ar e not pr esent.
The individual or organization must supply written proof of
additional l iability insur ance.
All participants must sign a release agreement form. Figure
26.5 shows a samp le release of liability form. Check any such
form for compl iance with current local and national laws
before using it. Reducing liability for on-pr emises injuries
during use of the facility is critical in any risk management
strategy .
All participants must follow the rules and regulations of the
strength and condi tioning f acility.
The athletic director and the strength and condi tioning director
have the right to limit an individual’ s or group’s access, if
warranted.
Figure 26.5  Sample release agreement form for
facility use by an outside individual or group.
(School Name)
Release Agreement
I, the undersigned,  do hereby acknow ledge and understand that I will be using
the (school name)  strength and condi tioning f acility.
1797
I further acknowledge that I have been advised of the risks involved in the use of
the strength and conditioning facility and its equipment, and I further acknow ledge
that I have been warned that my use of the strength and condi tioning facility and
its equipment could r esult in injury or harm to m yself.
I acknowledge and assume any such risk to my person should I use the strength
and condi tioning f acility and i ts equipment.
In the event that I should sustain injury to myself as a result of my use of the
strength and condi tioning facility and its equipment, I hereby agree to hold
harmless the (school name)  , the coaches, athletic trainers, super visors, or any
other emplo yees.
I have read and fully understand the contents of this “hold harmless” agreement
and ex ecute same as m y own v oluntary act.
I agree to modify my workout to conform to the recommendations of the (school
name)  strength and condi tioning staff if asked to do so, and I agree to leave the
strength and condi tioning facility if asked to do so by a member of the (school
name)  strength and condi tioning staf f.
Signatur e: ____________________________ _
Date: ____________________________ _
Name (printed): ____________________________ _
Adapted f rom Earle (1993) and Epley (1998).
Record Keeping
Documentation is fundamental to the effective management of a
strength and condi tioning facility. Secure records should be kept on
file of cleaning  and maintenance, safety procedur es, manufacturer’s
warranties and guidel ines, assumption-of -risk or other informed
consent forms, medical waivers and clearance forms, personnel
credentials, professional guidelines and recommendations (e.g., use
of weight belts and resistance training techniques), and injury report
forms (30). Injury report forms should be maintained as long as
possible in case an injury suit is filed. The time during which
individuals can file a lawsuit (i.e., the statute of limitations ) varies
(from state to state in the United States as well as throughout the
world), so it is a good practice to maintain files indefini tely or to
check wi th a legal authori ty (20).
1798
Liability Insurance
Because of the potential for injury in athletic participation, it is
essential for strength and condi tioning staff members to purchase
professional liability insurance, especial ly if they are not covered
under the facility policy. Liability insurance is a contractual promise
by which the insurer promises to defend and indemni fy the insured,
up to the defined limits of liability, from certain defined liability risks
at the insurer’s cost in exchange for payment of a premium.
Strength and condi tioning professionals should consul t their human
resour ce manager, legal consul tant, or professional organization
(e.g., NSCA) f or further inf ormation.
Insurance is a contractual promise by which the insurer
promises to defend and indemnify the insured, up to the
defined limits of liability, from certain defined liability
risks at the insurer’s cost in exchange for payment of a
premium.
Product Liability
Product liability  refers to the legal responsi bilities of those who
manuf acture or sell products  if a person sustains injury or damage
as a result of using the product (1). Although strength and
condi tioning professionals may not manuf acture or sell a product,
they can be named as codefendants in product liability suits.
Therefore, it is important for strength and condi tioning professionals
to understand the concept of product liability and actions that could
place them at risk for litigation. Although product liability applies
only to those who are in the business of manuf acturing or selling
products, there are behaviors that can void liability of the
manuf acturer or seller and place responsibi lity in the hands of the
strength and condi tioning professional. Two key consider ations that
determine whether the manuf acturer or seller is liable are whether
the product has been changed from the condi tion in which it was
1799
original ly sold and whether the product is used as intended by the
manuf acturer (5). To avoid injury to athletes caused by strength and
condi tioning equipment, the f ollowing steps should be tak en:
Use equipment only for the purpose intended by the
manuf acturer. Refer to the manuf acturer’s instructional
materials that accompan y the equipment, including user age
and siz e speci fications.
Be certain that equipmen t meets existing professional
standar ds and guidel ines. Do not purchase and use equipment
that has been deemed unsaf e or ineffective by professional
organizations and experts. Be aware of equipment recalls, and
return such equipment to the manuf acturer immediately .
Buy only from reputable manuf acturers. Strength and
condi tioning professionals must do their homework to check
on the safety record of a manufacturer or seller and any claims
that may have been filed against that manuf acturer or seller.
Organizations such as the Better Business Bureau in the
United States, other strength  and condi tioning colleagues,  and
professional organizations are good resour ces for this
information.
Do not modify equipment unless such adaptations are clearly
designated and instructions for doing so are included in the
product information. Some equipment is designed to be
modified for specific needs, such as fitting, but directions for
modifying the pr oduct must be f ollowed exactly .
Apply all warning labels that accompan y a new equipment
purchase. If such labels are not placed on the machine in plain
view and an individual is injured (and the injury relates to
what the warning label addresses), the strength and
condi tioning pr ofessional can be held l iable.
Continual ly inspect equipment for damage and wear that may
place an athlete at risk for injury . To recogniz e potential
problems, the strength and condi tioning professional must
understand the purpose, capabi lities, and limitations of
1800