# Section 01.01

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 1: Structure and Function of Body Systems

**Section:** 01.01 -- Introduction and Musculoskeletal System

**PDF Pages:** 38--55

CHAPTER  1
STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION
OF BODY SYSTEMS
Michael D. Roberts, PhD
The author would like to acknowledge the significant contributions of N. Travis Triplett,
Duncan French, Ann Swank, Carwyn P.M. Sharp , Robert T. Harris, and Gary R. Hunter to
this chapter .
After completing this chapter, you will be able to
describe both the macr ostructur e and micr ostructur e of muscle
and bone;
describe the sl iding-fi lament theory of muscular contr action;
describe the speci fic morphological and ph ysiological
characteristics of di fferent muscle fiber t ypes and pr edict their
relative involvement in di fferent sport ev ents;
describe the anatomical and ph ysiological char acteristics of the
cardiovascular and r espiratory systems; and
predict the car diorespiratory r esponses to di fferent types of
exercise or sports ev ents.
Physical exercise and sport performance involve effective, purposef ul
movements of the body. These movements result from the forces
developed in muscles, which move the various body parts by acting
through lever systems of the skeleton. Skeletal muscle activation
38
initiates in upper motor neurons located in the cerebral cortex, and
activation signals are relayed to lower motor neurons residing in the
spinal cord that are part of the peripher al nervous system . Support
for this neuromuscular activity involves continuous delivery of
oxygen and nutrients to working tissues and removal of carbon
dioxide and metabol ic waste by-products from worki ng tissues
through activi ties of the car diovascular and r espiratory systems.
In order to best apply the available scienti fic knowledge  to the
training of athletes and the development of effective training
programs, strength and condi tioning professionals must have a basic
understanding of not only musculosk eletal function but also those
systems of the body that directly support the work of exercising
muscle. Accordingly , this chapter summariz es those aspects of the
anatom y and function of the musculosk eletal, neuromuscular ,
cardiovascular , and respiratory systems that are essential for
developing and maintaining muscular f orce and power .
39
Musculoskelet al System
The musculosk eletal system of the human body consists of bones,
joints, muscles, and tendons configur ed to allow the great variety of
movements characteristic of human activity. This section describes
the various components of the musculosk eletal system, both
individual ly and in the context of how they f unction together .
Skelet on
The muscles of the body function by pulling against bones that
rotate about joints. Muscles can only pull, not push, given that the
activation of muscles results in shortening contractions. Howev er,
through the system of bony levers, muscle contractions can be
manifested as either pulling or pushing forces against external
objects.
The body has approximately 206 bones, though the number can
vary. This relatively light, strong structur e provides leverage,
support, and protection to internal organs (figure 1.1). The axial
skeleton  consists of the skull (cranium), vertebr al column (vertebr a
C1 through the coccyx), ribs, and sternum. The appendicular
skeleton  includes the shoulder (or pectoral) girdle (left and right
scapula and clavicle); bones of the arms, wrists, and hands (left and
right humerus, radius, ulna, carpals, metacarpals, and phalanges);
the pelvic girdle (left and right coxal or innominate bones); and the
bones of the legs, ankles, and feet (left and right femur, patella,
tibia, fibula, tarsals, metatarsals, and phalanges).
Junctions of bones are called joints . Fibrous joints  (e.g., sutures
of the skull) allow virtual ly no movement, cartilaginous joints
(e.g., intervertebr al disks) allow limited movement, and synovial
joints  (e.g., elbow and knee) allow consider able movement.
Movements in relation to sports and exercise mainly occur at
synovial joints, whose most important features are low friction and
large range of motion. Articulating bone ends are covered with
smooth hyaline carti lage, and the entire joint is enclosed in a
40
capsule filled with synovial fluid. Additional supporting structur es
of ligament and carti lage usual ly exist (41).
FIGURE 1.1  (a) Front view and  (b) rear view of an adul t male human sk eleton.
41
What Factors Affect Skeletal Growth in an
Adult?
Aside from genetics, dietary habits and physical activity patterns affect the adult
skeleton. Several resear ch studies have supported resistance training as yielding
positive bone adaptations. Hence, consistently lifting heavy loads during job tasks
or via resistance training increases bone density and bone miner al content.
Consistently performing more explosiv e movements with impact facilitates similar
adaptations. Some of the highest bone densities have been observ ed in people
who engage in gymnastics or other activities that involve high-str ength, high-
power , or high-impact movements (29). Since bone adaptations occur less rapidly
compar ed to skeletal muscle, the consistent implementation of progressive
overload is important to f acilitate posi tive adaptations.
Virtual ly all joint movements consist of a rotation about points or
axes. Joints can be categoriz ed by the number of directions about
which rotation can occur. Uniaxial joints , such as the elbow ,
operate as hinges, essential ly rotating about only one axis. The knee
is often referred to as a hinge joint, but its axis of rotation actual ly
changes throughout the joint range of motion. Biaxial joints , such
as the ankle and wrist, allow movement about two perpendicular
axes. Multiaxial joints , including the shoulder and hip ball-and-
socket joints, allow movement about all three perpendicular axes
that define space.
The vertebral column  is made up of vertebr al bones separ ated
by flexible disks that allow movement to occur. The vertebr ae are
grouped into 7 cervical vertebrae in the neck region; 12 thoracic
vertebr ae in the middle to upper back; 5 lumbar vertebrae in the
lower back; 5 sacral vertebr ae, which are fused together and make
up the rear part of the pelvis; and 3 to 5 coccygeal vertebr ae, which
form a kind of vestigial internal tail extending down ward from the
pelvis.
42
Skelet al Musculature
The system of muscles that enables the skeleton to move is depicted
in figure 1.2. The connection point between bones is the joint, and
skeletal muscl es are attached to bones at each of their ends.
Without this arr angement, mo vement could not oc cur.
Musculoskeletal Macrostructure and Microstructure
Each skeletal muscle contains  muscle tissue made up of a variety of
cell types (with the most notable being muscle fibers), connectiv e
tissue, nerves, blood vessels , and a plethor a of cell types between
muscle fibers that serve different functions. Fibrous connectiv e
tissue, or epimysium , covers the body’s more than 430 skeletal
muscles. The epimysium is contiguous with the tendons at the ends
of the muscle  (figure 1.3). The tendon  is attached to bone
periosteum , a special ized connectiv e tissue covering all bones.
Notably , muscl e contractions pull on tendons, and in turn, this moves
bones that are attached to the associated tendons. Limb muscles
have two attachments to bone, including proximal  (closer  to the
trunk) and distal  (farther from the trunk) attachments. The two
attachments of trunk muscles are termed superior  (closer  to the
head) and inferior  (closer to the f eet).
Muscle cells, often called muscle fibers  or myofibers , are long
(sometimes running the entire length of a muscle), cylindrical cells
50 to 100 μm in diameter  (about the diameter of a human hair).
Muscle fibers have all their nuclei situated on the outer periphery of
the cell and have a striated appear ance when viewed with a
microscope under low magni fication. Under the epimysium the
muscle fibers are grouped in bundles (fasciculi ) that may consist of
up to 150 fibers, with the bundles surrounded by connectiv e tissue
called perimysium . Each muscle fiber is surrounded by connectiv e
tissue called endomysium , which is encircled by and is contiguous
with the muscle fiber membrane, or sarcolemma  (41). All the
connectiv e tissue—epim ysium, perim ysium, and endom ysium—is
contiguous with the tendon, so tension developed in a muscle cell is
43
transmi tted to the tendon and the bone to which it is attached
(figure 1.3).
The junction between a motor neuro n (nerve cell) and the
muscle fibers it innerv ates is called the motor end plate, or, more
often, the neuromuscular junction  (figure 1.4). Each muscle cell
has only one neuromuscular junction, although a single motor
neuron innerv ates many muscle fibers, sometimes hundr eds or even
thousands. A motor neuron and the muscle fibers it innerv ates are
called a motor unit. All the muscle fibers of a motor unit contract
together when they ar e stimulated b y the motor neur on.
The interior structur e of a muscle fiber is depicted in figure 1.5.
The sarcoplasm,  which is the cytoplasm of a muscle fiber, is an
aqueous medium through which the exchange of ions (sodium,
potassium, calcium) and metabol ites (ADP, ATP, inorganic
phosphate) occur to and from different organel les. Not only is the
sarcoplasm of critical importance to muscle fibers because of this
role, but intracellular organel les and structur es are also suspended in
the sarcoplasm. These organel les and structur es include the
contractile appar atus constructed of thick and thin protein filaments,
other proteins including metabol ic enzymes and signal ing proteins,
stored glycogen and fat particles, ribosomes that facilitate protein
synthesis, and special ized organel les such as mitochondria and the
sarcoplasmic r eticulum.
44
FIGURE 1.2  (a) Front view and  (b) rear view of adul t male human sk eletal musculatur e.
45
FIGURE 1.3 Schematic drawing of a muscle illustrating three types of connectiv e tissue:
epimysium (the outer layer), perim ysium (surrounding each fasciculus, or group of muscle
fibers), and endom ysium (surr ounding individual muscle fibers).
46
FIGURE 1.4  Motor unit, consisting of a motor neuron and the muscle fibers it
innerv ates. A single motor uni t typical ly contains sev eral hundr ed muscle fibers.
47
FIGURE 1.5  Sectional view of a muscle fiber .
Hundr eds of myofibrils  (each about 1 μm in diameter , 1/100 the
diameter of a hair) exist in the sarcoplasm of one muscle fiber.
Myofibrils are the contractile machinery of muscle fibers, and two
types of myofilaments  are highly enriched in myofibrils, including
myosin  and actin . The thicker myosin filaments (about 16 nm in
diameter , or 1/10,000 the diameter of a hair) contain up to 200
myosin molecu les. A single myosin molecule consists of two myosin
heavy chain proteins and four myosin light chain proteins. This
molecule also contains two head-like features (one being  from each
of the two heavy chains), two hinge points below each head, and
two tail-like features that act to keep the two heavy chain proteins
bound. When examining a thick filament containing hundr eds of
myosin molecules, the globular heads protrude away from the thick
filament at regular interv als, and the head-l ike structur es form
crossbridges  with actin filaments during muscle contraction. The
thin actin filaments (about 6 nm in diameter) consist of two strands
arranged in a double helix. Myosin and actin filaments are organized
longitudinal ly in the smallest contractile unit of skeletal muscle
termed the sarcomere . Sarcomer es average about 2.5 μm in length
in a relaxed fiber (appr oximately 4,500 per centimeter of muscle
48
length) and are repeated through the entire length of myofibrils that
span the muscle fiber (4).
The arrangement of the myosin and actin filaments within
sarcomer e boundaries give muscle fibers a striated dark/l ight
appear ance under magni fication. The dark A-band  corresponds with
the alignment of the myosin filaments, whereas the light I-band
corresponds with the areas in two adjacent sarcomer es that contain
only actin filaments (41). The Z-line  is in the middle of the I-band
and appears as a thin, dark line running longitudinal ly through the I-
band. The H-zone  is the area in the center of the sarcomer e, where
only myosin filaments are present. During muscle contraction, the H-
zone decreases as the actin filaments slide over myosin filaments
toward the center of the sarcomer e. The I-band also decreases as
the Z-lines ar e pulled tow ard the center of the sar comer e.
49
FIGURE 1.6 Gener al view of the myosin and actin filaments in muscle. The arrangemen t
of myosin (thick) and actin (thin) fi laments giv es skeletal muscle i ts striated appear ance.
50
Figure 1.6 shows a simplistic depiction of myosin and actin in the
sarcomer e. Biochemical bonds allow for myosin proteins to
aggregate into the highly organized thick myosin filament, and thick
filaments are anchor ed to special ized proteins in the M-line, which is
in the center of the sarcomere (the center of the H-zone). Actin
filaments are anchor ed to Z-lines through another set of special ized
proteins. Although both M-lines and Z-lines exist in tandem
throughout the entire myofibril, individual sarcomer es are defined as
the thick myosin and thin actin filaments as well as associated
proteins found between two Z-lines. It is also notable that six actin
filaments surround each myosin filament, and each actin filament is
surrounded by three myosin filaments. This lattice-like arrangement
enables a highly organized and efficient structur e for muscular
contraction.
Each myofibril is encased by an intricate system of tubules, called
the sarcoplasmic reticulum  (figure 1.5, page 5), which terminates
as vesicles in the vicinity of the Z-lines. Calcium ions are stored in
the sarcoplasmic reticulum, and muscle activation leads to the
release of these calcium stores to facilitate muscular contraction.
Dischar ge of an action potential  (an electrical nerve impulse)
arrives nearly simultaneously  from the surface to all depths of the
muscle fiber. Calcium is thus released throughout the muscle fiber,
producing a coor dinated contr action of the entir e cell.
51
FIGURE 1.7 Contr action at the sarcomer e level. (a) In stretched muscle the I-bands and
H-zone are elongated and there is low force potential due to a reduction in actin and
myosin overlap and, thus, actin-m yosin cross-bridge formation potential.  (b) When muscle
52
contracts (here partial ly), the I-bands  and H-zone are shortened. In this example, force
potential is highest  due to optimal actin and myosin overlap. (c) With contracted muscle,
force potential is again low because actin and m yosin o verlap is not optimal.
The discharge of an action potential from a motor
neuron signals the release of calcium from the
sarcoplasmic reticulum into the myofibrils of a muscle
fiber, leading to a cascade of events that result in the
contraction of the muscle fiber.
Sliding-Filament Theory of Muscular Contraction
The sliding-filament theory  was proposed by Huxley and Hanson
in 1954 to mechanistical ly explain muscular contraction at the
molecular level (22). In its simplest form, the sliding-filament theory
indicates that actin filaments anchor ed to each end of the sarcomer e
slide inward on myosin filaments. This results in Z-lines being pulled
toward the center of the sarcomer e and in muscle fiber shortening
(figure 1.7). As actin filaments slide over myosin filaments, both the
H-zone and I-band shrink. The energy-dependent association of
myosin heads with actin filaments (i.e., actin-m yosin crossbridge
formation), as well as the energy-dependent inward movement of
actin filaments over the myosin filaments through what is termed the
power stroke , are the bases for muscle contraction. Although a
very small displacement of an actin filament occurs with each power
stroke, this action is rapidly repeated across all sarcomer es during
voluntary muscle contractions  leading to appreciable movement with
prolonged contr actions (41).
Resting Phase
When a muscle is not active, low levels of calcium are present in the
myofibrils of muscle fibers (most of it is stored in the sarcoplasmic
reticulum), so v ery few actin-m yosin cr ossbridges ar e formed.
Excitation–Contraction Coupling Phase
53
When a motor neuron activates a muscle fiber, a cascade  of events
occur that stimulate the sarcoplasmic reticulum to release calcium
ions into the myofibrils of the muscle fiber. Secreted calcium ions
bind with a high affinity to the troponin  protein, which exists at
regular interv als along the actin filament (figure 1.6). This calcium-
troponin interaction causes a shift in another protein termed
tropomyosin , which is bound to troponin and spans the length of
the actin filament. These events expose the myosin binding site on
actin and enable the myosin head to attach to the actin filament to
form an actin- myosin crossbr idge (4). It is important to understand
that the amount of force produced by any given muscle is directly
related to the number of actin-m yosin crossbridges formed within
the muscle fibers of that muscle (4). Thus, activities that require a
high force output necessi tate the activation (or recruitment) of most
motor neurons and the muscle fibers they innerv ate to achieve the
maximal amount of actin-m yosin cr ossbridge f ormation.
The number of actin-myo sin crossbridges formed within
the muscle fibers of a given muscle at any instant in
time dictates the force production of the muscle.
Contraction Phase
The contraction phase involves the mechanical movement (or
pivoting) of the myosin head from the resting phase when  the actin-
myosin crossbridge is formed, which leads to the pulling of the
associated actin filament to the center of the sarcomer e. Critically,
this mechanical movement is catalyz ed from the biochemical energy
provided by the hydrolysis (or breakdown) of adenosine triphosphate
(ATP) by the myosin adenosine triphosphatase  (ATPase)
enzyme present on the myosin head. The products of ATP hydrolysis
include adenosine diphosphate (ADP) and inorganic phosphate (Pi),
metabol ites that also serve critical roles in the contraction process.
While the different phases of the contraction phase are relatively
complex, they can be summariz ed as f ollows:
54
1. The myosin head hydrolyzes ATP into ADP and Pi, both of
which remain bound to the myosin head. The energy provided
by this biochemical reaction results in a conformational change
whereby the m yosin head is cock ed into a high-ener gy state.
2. In its high-ene rgy state, the myosin head binds to actin to
form the actin-m yosin cr ossbridge.
3. The release of Pi from the myosin head catalyz es a
confirmational change in the myosin molecule, leading to the
power stroke, which is the pivoting of the myosin head that
pulls the actin fi lament tow ard the center of the sar comer e.
4. Following the first power stroke, ADP is released from the
myosin head and another ATP molecule binds to the myosin
head.
5. The actin-m yosin crossbridge is subsequently dissociated, the
myosin head returns to its original low-energy state and
conformation, and the process is repeated with the hydrolysis
of the newly bound A TP molecule.
So long as calcium ions remain bound to troponin during muscle
activation, contiguous rapid rounds of actin-m yosin crossbridge
formation, power strokes, and actin-m yosin crossbridge dissociation
will occur, and this is termed crossbridge cycling .
Calcium and ATP are necessary for crossbridge cycling
with actin and myosin filaments.
Relaxation Phase
Relaxation occurs when the stimulation of the motor neuron ceases.
Calcium is pumped back into the sarcoplasmic reticulum through
special ized transporters that also require ATP, and the restoration of
low calcium ion concentr ations in myofibrils highly reduces the
number of actin-m yosin cr ossbridges.
55