# Section 01.02

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 1: Structure and Function of Body Systems

**Section:** 01.02 -- Neuromuscular System

**PDF Pages:** 56--65

Neuromuscular System
Muscle fibers are innerv ated by motor neurons that transmi t
impulses in the form of electrochemical signals from the spinal cord
to the muscle . A motor neuron gener ally has numer ous terminal
branches at the end of its axon, allowing for several muscle fibers to
be innerv ated. This integr ated structur e is termed the motor unit.
Motor units can be gener ally described as slow-twitch, fast-
twitch/fatigue-r esistant, and fast-twitch/fatigable. These motor unit
characteristics dictate muscle fiber type, contractile characteristics,
and in volvement in di fferent types of activi ties and ex ercise.
Activation of Muscles
When a motor neuron fires an impulse or action potent ial, all the
muscle fibers that it innerv ates are simultaneously activated and
contract through the mechan isms previously described. The number
of muscle fibers vary within each motor unit. Muscles that are
required to function with great precision, such as eye muscles, may
have motor units with as few as one muscle fiber. Changes in the
number of active motor units in these small muscles can produce the
extremely fine gradations in force that are necessary for precise
movements of the eyeball. In contrast, the quadriceps muscle group,
which moves the leg with much less precision, may have several
hundr ed muscle fibers innerv ated b y one motor neur on.
An action potential is an electr ochemical signal that travels along
a motor neuron from the cell body to the nerve terminal. Howev er,
this signal is not capable of directly exciting muscle fibers. Instead,
the arrival of the action potential at nerve terminals of the motor
neuron causes the secretion of a neurotransmi tter called
acetylcholine  to each of the neuromusc ular junctions contained
within the motor unit. Secreted acetylchol ine binds to and activates
acetylchol ine receptors present on the sarcolemma of muscle fibers
within the motor unit. Once enough acetylchol ine receptors are
activated, action potentials are gener ated along the sarcolemma of
56
these muscle fibers. These action potentials continue down T-tubules
to eventual ly catalyz e the release of calcium from the sarcoplasmic
reticulum as discussed earlier in this chapter . These events ultimately
lead to all the muscle fibers within the motor unit to simultaneously
contract and develop force. There is no evidence to date suggesting
that an active motor unit only activates a portion of the muscle
fibers to contract. Similarly, no evidence to date suggests that
individual muscle fibers can be partial ly activated within an active
motor unit. Hence, the all-or-none principle  has been gener ally
used to describe this phenomenon; specifically, the activation of any
given motor neuron will lead to the activation and contraction of all
of the muscle fibers i t innerv ates.
Each action potential traveling down a motor neuron results in the
rapid activation of the muscle fibers within the motor unit. The brief
contraction that occurs in response to one action potential is referred
to as a twitch . Although calcium release from the sarcoplasmic
reticulum during a twitch is sufficient to allow for actin-myosin
crossbridging to occur, a brief twitch (which lasts milliseconds) does
not enable a high level of force to be developed given that calcium is
rapidly sequester ed back to the sarcoplasmic reticulum and the
muscle fiber relaxes (figure 1.8a). If a second twitch is elicited from
the motor neuron before the innerv ated muscle fibers completely
relax, forces gener ated from the two twitches summate, resulting in
a greater force relative to that which is produced by a single twitch
(figure 1.8b). Decreasing the time interv al between twitches results
in an even greater force summation, and a high activation frequency
leads to the merging of twitches in what has been termed  unfused
and fused tetanic  contraction s (figure 1.8c and d). The force
gener ated by a motor unit during fused tetanic contractions (i.e., the
maximal tetanic force) is the maximal force that the motor unit can
develop (8). The ability of motor units to sustain this type of
contraction (along with the size of muscle fibers and motor unit
recruitment patterns) is likely one of the key determinants of
maximal f orce and power outputs during athletic endea vors.
57
FIGURE 1.8 Twitch, twitch summation, and tetanus of a motor unit: a = single twitch; b
= force resulting from summation of two twi tches;  c = unf used tetanus;  d = fused tetanus.
Muscle Fiber Types
Skeletal muscles are composed of muscle fibers that have markedly
different morphological and physiological characteristics (37). These
differences have led to different classification systems, with the most
familiar including the terms slow-twitch  and fast-twitch  muscle
fibers. Becaus e a motor unit innerv ates muscle fibers that are
metabol ically and functional ly similar to one another , motor units
have also been historical ly designated using this nomenclatur e. A
fast-twitch motor unit is one that develops force and relaxes rapidly ,
thus exhibi ting a shorter twitch time. Slow-twitch motor units, in
contrast, develop force and relax slowly and have a longer twitch
time. Gener al differences between these types of motor units can be
found in figure 1.9.
Regarding muscle fiber classification, histochemical staining for
myosin ATPase content was also used for years to classify myofibers
as type I (slow-twitch), type IIa (fast-twitch), and type IIx (fast-
twitch). Other methods used for myofiber classification involve single
fiber isolation techniques to quanti fy the presence of different
myosin heavy chain isoforms and immunohistochemical staining for
myosin heavy chain isoforms (33). The nomenclatur e for both
techniques is akin to that associated with the myosin ATPase
histology methods.
58
Fiber types are also delineate d by differences in fatigue resistance
and force production capabi lities, and this can be due to small to
moder ate differences in cellular morphology , intracellular protein
content, and organel le distribution. For instance, type I fibers are
gener ally more fatigue resistant relative to type II fibers, and type I
fibers have a higher capaci ty to produce ATP via aerobic metabol ism.
This difference can be largely attributed to mitochondrial
characteristic differences between fiber types, because type I fibers
have a higher density and a more even distribution of mitochondria
between myofibrils relative to type II fibers (31). Howev er, type I
fibers produce  less overall force and yield a lower rate of force
development compar ed to type II fibers. These latter characteristic
differences are chiefly due to type I myofibers exhibi ting lower
cellular diameters (and thus less myofibrils per cell) compar ed to
type II fibers (21). Additional ly, myosin ATPase reaction rates differ
between the type I and II isoforms, wherein the type I isoform
exhibi ts a relatively lower reaction rate and thus a reduced rate at
which cr ossbridge cy cling can oc cur (38).
59
FIGURE 1.9 Comparison of slow- and fast-twitch motor units: a = schema tic of slow-
twitch and fast-twitch motor units innerv ating separ ate sets of muscle  fibers;  b =
characteristics of slow-twitch and fast-twitch motor units; c = hypoth etical differences
between unweighted versus weighted arm curls on slow-twitch and fast-twitch motor unit
recruitment patterns. Note:  In healthy individua ls this innerv ation pattern (a) exists in a
pseudo-r andom mosaic pattern. Unlike non-weighted contractions that recruit lower
threshold motor units, weighted contractions  (c) will recruit both lower threshold slow-
60
twitch and higher threshold fast-twitch motor units, which is an example of the size
principle of motor uni t recruitment.
Other notable differences exist between type I and II fibers. For
instance, type I fibers have more contacts with capillaries compar ed
to type II fibers (5, 19, 23, 34), and this feature (along with smaller
cellular diameters and more intracellular myoglobin) yields a higher
oxygen diffusion potential that favors aerobic metabol ism. A 2021
resear ch study using sophisticated molecular approache s has also
unveiled that the content of hundr eds of structur al and metabol ic
proteins differs between type I, IIa, and IIx fibers (30), and these
findings suggest that these appreciable differences contribute to the
unique fiber type characteristics discussed in this paragraph. Based
on these differences, it is not surprising that postur al muscles, such
as the soleus, have a high composi tion of type I fibers, whereas
larger locomotor muscles, such as the quadriceps muscl es, have a
mixtur e of both type I and type II fibers to enable both low and high
power output activities (such as jogging and sprinting, respectiv ely).
Refer to table 1.1 for a summar y of the primary characteristics of
fiber t ypes.
Motor units are composed of muscle fibers with specific
morphological and physiological characteristics that
determine their functional capacity.
TABLE 1.1  Major Characteristics of Muscle Fiber
Types
Characteristic Fiber types
Type I Type IIa Type IIx
Motor neur on siz e Small Large Large
Recruitment thr eshold Low Intermediate/high High
Nerve conduction v elocity Slow Fast Fast
61
Characteristic Fiber types
Contr action speed Slow Fast Fast
Relaxation speed Slow Fast Fast
Fatigue r esistance High Intermediate/low Low
Endur ance High Intermediate/low Low
Force production Low Intermediate High
Power output Low Intermediate/high High
Aerobic enzyme content High Intermediate/low Low
Anaer obic enzyme content Low High High
Sarcoplasmic r eticulum complexi ty Low Intermediate/high High
Capillary densi ty High Intermediate Low
Myoglobin content High Low Low
Mitochondrial siz e, densi ty High Intermediate Low
Fiber diameter Small Intermediate Large
Color Red White/red White
Motor Unit Recruitment Patterns
Through everyday experiences, it is evident that a given muscle can
vary its level of force output according to the level required by a
particular task. This ability to vary or gradate force is essential for
performance of smooth, coordinated patterns of movement.
Muscular force can be graded in two ways. One is through variation
in the frequenc y at which motor units are activated. A single twitch
results from one action poten tial, and this does not produce a great
deal of force. Howev er, if the frequency of activation is increased so
that the forces of the twitches begin to overlap or summate, the
resulting force developed by the motor unit is much greater. This
method of varying force output is especial ly importan t in small
muscles, such as those of the hand. Even at low forces, most of the
motor units in these muscles are activated, albeit at a low frequency .
62
Force output of the whole muscle is intensi fied through an increase
in the frequency of firing of individual motor units. Another manner
to increase muscle force involves increasing the number of motor
units activated, a process known as recruitment . In large muscles,
such as those in the thigh, most motor units are required to be
activated at relatively higher frequencies during near-maximal
contraction efforts. As a result, increases in force output are
achiev ed through increases in motor unit firing frequency as well as
the recruitment of addi tional motor uni ts.
TABLE 1.2  Relative Involvement of Muscle Fiber
Types in Sport Events
Event Type I Type II
100 m sprint Low High
800 m run High High
Marathon High Low
Olympic weightl ifting Low High
Soccer, lacrosse, hock ey High High
American f ootbal l wide r eceiver Low High
American f ootbal l lineman Low High
Basketball, team handbal l Low High
Volleybal l Low High
Basebal l or softbal l pitcher Low High
Mixed martial arts High High
Wrestling High High
50 m swim Low High
Field ev ents Low High
Cross-country ski ing, biathlon High Low
Tennis High High
63
Event Type I Type II
Downhi ll or slalom ski ing High High
Speed skating High High
Bobsled Low High
Distance cy cling High Low
Rowing High High
The types of motor units recruited for a given activity are
determined by the physiological demand imposed by that activity
over a given unit of time (table 1.2). For an activity such as slower
long-distance running, slow-twitch motor units are predominantly
engaged in working muscles given that physiological demand is not
relatively high over time and these motor units possess a heightened
endur ance capaci ty and resistance to fatigue. Sprints at the end of a
race that impose a relatively higher physiological demand, howev er,
require the additional activation of fast-twitch motor units. If an
activity requires near-maxim al contractions over very short time
periods, such as those obser ved with the power clean, most of the
motor units in the involved muscle(s) are recruited and the fast-
twitch motor units make more of a significant contribution to the
effort. Electr omyography estimates have indicated that maximal
voluntary contractions with higher intensi ty weightl ifting typical ly
lead to approximately 90% or more activation of available motor
units in the involved muscle(s) (7). Howev er, some caveats must be
consider ed with this estimat ion. First, the activation of the entire
motor neuron pool is probably not possible in untrained people (9,
10, 18). Moreover, although large fast-twitch units may be recruited
if the effort is substantial, it is probably not possible to activate them
at a high enough frequency under most circumstances for maximal
force to be realized. These details aside, it is important to appreciate
that motor unit activation varies regarding different types of physical
activity.
64
The force output of a muscle can be varied through
changes in the frequenc y of activation of individual
motor units as well as a change in the number of
activated motor units.
Proprioception
Proprioceptors  are special ized sensory receptors located within
joints, muscles, and tendons. Because these receptors are sensitive
to pressure and tension, they relay information concerning muscle
dynamics to the conscious and subconscious parts of the central
nervous system. The brain is thus provided with information
concerning kinesthetic sense, or conscious appreciation of the
position of body parts with respect to gravity. Most of this
proprioceptiv e information, howev er, is processed at subconscious
levels so we do not have to dedicate conscious activity toward tasks
such as maintaining postur e or posi tion of body parts.
Proprioceptors are specialized sensory receptors that
provide the central nervous system with information
needed to maintain muscle tone and perform complex
coordinated movements.
Muscle Spindles
Muscle spindles  are proprioceptors that consist of several modified
muscle fibers enclosed in a sheath of connectiv e tissue (figure 1.10).
These modified fibers, called intrafusal fibers, run parallel to the
normal, or extrafusal , fibers. Muscle spindles provide information
concerning muscle length and the rate of change in length. When
the muscle lengthens, spindles are stretched. This deformation
activates the sensory neuron of the spindle, which sends an impulse
to the spinal cord, where it synapses (connects) with motor neurons.
This results in the activation of motor neurons that innervate the
same muscle. Spindles thus indicate the degree to which the muscle
65