# Section 2.1

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 2: Biomechanics of Resistance Exercise

**Section:** 2.1 -- Skeletal Musculature

**PDF Pages:** 104--113

CHAPTER  2
BIOMECHANICS OF
RESISTANCE EXERCISE
William R. Johnson, PhD, and Jason Lake, PhD
The authors would like to acknowle dge the significant contributions of Jeffrey M.
McBride and Ev erett Harman to this chapter .
After completing this chapter, you will be able to
identi fy the major components of sk eletal musculatur e;
differentiate the v arious t ypes of lev ers of the musculosk eletal
system;
identi fy primary anatomical mo vements during sport activi ties
and ex ercises;
outline cor e mechanical f actors associated wi th mo vement;
describe the f actors contributing to human str ength and power;
evaluate r esistiv e force and power pat terns of ex ercise devices;
and
identi fy factors of importance f or joint biomechanics wi th
exercise.
Knowledge of biomechanics is important for describing and
understanding human movements, including those involved in sport
and exercise. Biomechanics  focuses on the mechanisms  through
104
which the components of the musculosk eletal system interact to
create movement. Having insight into how body movements are
carried out and the stresses that the movements place on the
musculosk eletal system facilitates the design of safe and effective
resistance training programs and maximiz es the potential for human
endur ance, str ength, and power .
This chapter begins with an overview of skeletal musculatur e,
body mechanics, and the primary movement patterns during sport
activities and exercise, followed by biomechanical principles that
connect the manifestation of human strength and movement. Next,
the primary sources of resistance to muscle contraction used in
exercise device s—including gravity, inertia, friction, fluid resistance,
and elastici ty—are discussed. Then we turn to concerns with
resistance training that relate to joint biomechanics (with special
emphasis on the shoulders, back, and knees).
105
Skelet al Musculature
To cause movement or to generate force  against external objects,
both ends of each skeletal muscle must be attached to bone by
connectiv e tissue. Traditional ly, anatomists define the muscle’ s
origin  as its proximal  (toward the center of the body) attachment
and its insertion  as its distal  (away from the center of the body)
attachment. Sometimes the origin is defined as the more stationary
structur e to which the muscle is attached and the insertion as the
more mobile structur e. This defini tion can lead to a confusing
reversal of the origin and insertion. For example, during a straight-
leg sit-up, the origin of the iliacus muscle is the femur, because of its
relative immobi lity. The pelvis, being more mobile, is the insertion.
Howev er, during the leg raise exercise, the pelvis is relatively
immobi le and would therefore become the origin, while the more
mobile femur would become the insertion. The traditional defini tion
therefore provides the most consistency .
Muscles are attached to bone in various ways. In fleshy
attachments , which are most often found at the proximal end of a
muscle, muscle  fibers are directly affixed to the bone, usually over a
wide area so that force is distributed rather than localized. Fibrous
attachments , such as tendons , blend into and are continuous
with both the muscle sheaths and the connectiv e tissue surrounding
the bone. They have additional fibers that extend into the bone
itself, making f or a v ery str ong union.
Virtual ly all body movements  involve the action of more than one
muscle. The muscle most directly involved in bringing about a
movement is called the prime mover, or agonist . A muscle that can
slow down or stop the movement is called the antagonist . The
antagonist assists in joint stabilization and in braking the limb toward
the end of a fast movement, thereby protecting ligamentous and
cartilaginous joint structu res from potential ly destructiv e forces.
During throwing, for example, the triceps acts as an agonist,
extending the elbow to accelerate the ball. As the elbow approaches
106
full extension, the biceps acts as an antagonist to slow down elbow
extension and bring it to a stop, thereby protecting elbow  structur es
from internal impact.
A muscle is called a synergist  when it assists indirectly in a
movement. For example, the muscles that stabilize the scapula act
as syner gists during upper arm movement. Without these syner gists,
the muscles that move the upper arm (many of which originate on
the scapula) would not be effective in bringing about this movement.
Synergists are also required to control body motion when the agonist
is a muscle that crosses two joints. For example, the rectus femoris
muscle crosses the hip and knee, acting to flex the hip and extend
the knee when  contracting. Rising from a low squat involves both hip
and knee extension. If the rectus femoris is to act to extend the
knee as a person rises without inclining the trunk forward, hip
extensor muscles such as the gluteus maximus must act
syner gistical ly to counter act the hip flexion that would otherwise
result from tension in the r ectus f emoris.
Levers of the Musculoskeletal System
Although there are many muscles in the body that do not act
through levers, such as muscles of the face, tongue, heart, arteries,
and sphincters, body movements directly involved in sport and
exercise prima rily act through the bony levers of the skeleton. In
order to understand how the body affects such movements, a basic
knowledge of lev ers is r equired. Several basic defini tions f ollow.
first-class lever—A lever for which the muscle force and resistiv e
force act on opposi te sides of the f ulcrum ( figure 2.1).
107
FIGURE 2.1 A first-class lever (the forearm). Elbow extension against resistance (e.g., a
triceps extension exercise).  O = fulcrum ; FM = muscle force; FR = resistiv e force; MM =
moment arm of the muscle force; MR = momen t arm of the resistiv e force. Mechanical
advantage = MM/MR = 5 cm/40 cm = 0.125, which, being less than 1.0, is a disadv antage
in the common sense.
fulcrum— The piv ot point of a lev er.
lever— A rigid or semirigid body that, when subjected to a force
whose line of action does not pass through its pivot point, exerts
force on an y object impeding i ts tendency to r otate ( figure 2.2).
108
FIGURE 2.2 A lever. The lever can transmi t force tangential to the arc of rotation from
one contact point along the object ’s length to another . FA = force applied to the lever; MAF
= moment arm of the applied force; FR = force resisting the lever’s rotation;  MRF = moment
arm of the resistiv e force. The lever applies a force on the object equal in magnitude to but
opposi te in dir ection f rom FR.
mechanical advantage— The ratio of the moment arm through
which an applied force acts to that through which a resistiv e force
acts. For there to be a state of equilibrium between the applied
and resistiv e torques, the product of the muscle force and the
moment arm through which it acts must equal the product of the
resistiv e force and the moment arm through which it acts.
Therefore, a mechanical advantage, represented as a ratio greater
than 1.0, allows the applied (muscle) force to be less than the
resistiv e force to produce an equal amount of torque. Conversely ,
a calculated mechanical advantage of a ratio less than 1.0
indicates that one must apply greater (muscle) force than the
amount of resistiv e force present, creating an obvious
disadv antage f or the muscle.
moment arm (also called force arm, lever arm, or torque arm)—
The perpendicular distance from the line of action of the force to
the fulcrum. The line of action of a force is an infinitely long line
passing through the point of application of the force, oriented in
the dir ection in which the f orce is ex erted.
muscle force— Force gener ated by biochem ical activity, or the
stretching of noncontr actile tissue, which tends to draw the
opposi te ends of a muscle tow ard each other .
109
resistive force— Force generated by a source external to the body
(e.g., gravity, inertia, f riction) that acts contr ary to muscle f orce.
second-class lever— A lever for which the muscle force and
resistiv e force act on the same side of the fulcrum, with the
muscle force acting through a moment arm longer than that
through which the resistiv e force acts, as when the calf muscles
work to raise the body onto the balls of the feet (figure 2.3). Due
to its mechanical advantage (i.e., relatively long moment arm),
the required muscle force is smaller than the resistiv e force (body
weight).
third-class lever— A lever for which the muscle force and resistiv e
force act on the same side of the fulcrum, with the muscle force
acting through a moment arm shorter than that through which
the resistive force acts (figure 2.4). The mechan ical advantage is
thus less than 1.0, so the muscle force has to be greater than the
resistiv e force to produce torque equal to that produced by the
resistiv e force.
torque  (also called moment )—The degree to which a force tends
to rotate an object about a specified fulcrum. It is defined
quanti tatively as the magni tude of a force times the length of its
moment arm.
110
FIGURE 2.3 A second-class lever (the foot). Plantar flexion against resistance (e.g., a
standing heel raise exercise).  FM = muscle force; FR = resistiv e force; MM = moment arm of
the muscle  force; MR = momen t arm of the resistiv e force. When the body is raised, the ball
of the foot, being the point about which the foot rotates, is the fulcrum  (O). Because MM is
greater than  MR, FM is less than  FR.
Figure 2.1 shows a first-class lever, because muscle force and
resistiv e force act on opposi te sides of the fulcrum. During isometric
exertion or constant -speed joint rotation, FM × MM = FR × MR.
Because MM is much smaller than MR, FM must be much  greater than
FR; this illustrates the disadv antageous nature of this arrangement
(i.e., a large muscle force is required to push against a relatively
small external r esistance).
111
FIGURE 2.4 A third-class lever (the forearm). Elbow flexion against resistance (e.g., a
biceps curl exercise).  FM = muscle force; FR = resistiv e force; MM = moment arm of the
muscle force; MR = moment arm of the resistiv e force. Because  MM is much smaller than
MR, FM must be much gr eater than  FR.
Most human muscles that rotate the limbs about body joints
operate at a mechanical advantage of less than 1.0 (that is, at a
mechanical disadvantage). This is why internal muscle forces are
much greater than the forces exerted by the body on external
objects. For example, in figure 2.2, becau se the resistance moment
arm is eight times longer than the muscle moment arm, muscle
force must be eight times the resistiv e force. The extremely high
internal forces experienced by muscles and tendons account in large
part for injury to these tissues. During actual movement, the
categorization of a lever as first, second, or third class often depends
on the somewhat arbitrary decision of where the fulcrum lies.
Therefore, understanding the principle of mechanical advantage is of
much gr eater importance than being able to classi fy levers.
112
Mechanical advantage often changes continuously during real-
world activi ties. The f ollowing ar e examples of this.
113