# Chapter 3: Bioenergetics of Exercise and Training

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

**PDF Pages:** 174--226

CHAPTER  3
BIOENERGETICS OF
EXERCISE AND TRAINING
Dale W. Chapman, PhD
The author would like to acknowledge the significant contributions of Trent J. Herda and
Joel T . Cramer to this chapter .
After completing this chapter, you will be able to
explain the basic ener gy systems a vailable to supply A TP during
exercise;
understand lactate ac cumulation, metabol ic acidosis, and
cellular mani festations of f atigue;
identi fy patterns of substr ate depletion and r epletion during
various ex ercise intensi ties;
describe the bioener getic f actors that l imit exercise
performance;
critique tr aining pr ograms based on the metabol ic speci ficity of
training; and
explain the metabol ic demands of and r ecovery from interv al
training, high-intensi ty interv al training, and combination
training to optimiz e work -to-rest ratios.
Metabolic specificity  of exercise and training is based on an
understanding of the transfer of energy in biological systems.
174
Through an understanding of how energy transfer occurs, more
efficient and productiv e training programs can be designed. After
defining essential bioener getics terminology and explaining the role
of adenosine triphosphate (ATP), this chapter discusses the three
basic energy systems that work to replenish ATP in human skeletal
muscle. Then we look at substrate depletion and repletion, especial ly
as they relate to fatigue and recovery; bioener getic factors that limit
performance; and aerobic and anaer obic contributions to oxygen
uptak e. Final ly, the metabol ic speci ficity of tr aining is discussed.
175
Essential Terminology
Bioenergetics , or the flow of energy  in a biological system,
concerns primari ly the conversion of macronutrients—carboh ydrate,
protein, and fats, which contain chemical energy—into biological ly
usable forms of energy. It is the breakdown of the chemic al bonds in
these macronutrients that provides the energy necessary to perform
biological work.
The breakdow n of large molecules into smaller molecules,
associated with the release of energy, is termed catabolism . The
synthesis of larger molecules from smaller molecules can be
accompl ished using the energy released from catabol ic reactions;
this building-up process is termed anabolism . The breakdown of
protein into amino acids is an example of catabol ism, while the
formation of proteins from amino acids is an anabol ic process.
Exergonic reactions  are energy-releasing reactions and are
gener ally catabolic. Endergonic reactions  require energy and
include anabol ic processes and the contraction of muscle.
Metabolism  is the sum of all catabol ic or exergonic and anabol ic or
ender gonic reactions in a biological system. Energy derived from
catabol ic or exergonic reactions is used to drive anabol ic or
ender gonic reactions through an intermediate molecule, adenosine
triphosphate (ATP) . ATP allows the transfer of energy from
exergonic to ender gonic reactions. Thus, exergonic (i.e., energy-
releasing) reactions are coupled with ender gonic (i.e., energy-
requiring) reactions, based on the production or breakdown of ATP,
respectiv ely. Without an adequate supply of ATP, muscular activity
and muscle growth would not be possible because the process
reflects the metabol ic system ’s current ability to supply the demand
of the required activity. Thus, when an exercise steady state is
achiev ed, ATP supply meets ATP demand. Howev er, fatigue results
when ATP supply does not meet the ATP requirements demanded by
a given activity. Following a period of appropriate condi tioning, the
metabol ic systems of the body adapt to be better able to supply the
176
ATP to meet the ATP demand of the same activity that once resulted
in fatigue. It is important to note that the nature of the activity has
not changed, but the metabo lic system’ s capaci ty to do the activity
changes with training. Thus, when designing training programs,
strength and condi tioning professionals need to have a basic
understanding of how exercise affects ATP hydrolysis and
resynthesis.
Adenosine triphosphate is composed of adenosine and three
phosphate groups (figure 3.1). Adenosine is the combination of
adenine (a nitrogen-contain ing base) and ribose (a five-carbon
sugar). The breakdown of one molecule of ATP to yield energy is
known as hydrolysis , becau se it requires one molecule of water.
The hydrolysis of ATP is catalyzed by the presence of an enzyme
called adenosine triphosphatase (ATPase) . Specifically, myosin
ATPase  is the enzyme  that catalyz es ATP hydrolysis for crossbridge
recycling. Other specific enzymes hydrolyze ATP at other locations,
such as calcium ATPase  for pumping calcium into the sarcoplasmic
reticulum (following muscle contraction) and sodium-potassium
ATPase  for maintaining the sarcolemmal concentr ation gradient
after depolarization (59). The following equation depicts the
reactants (left), enzyme (middle), and products (right) of ATP
hydrolysis:
 ATP +H2 O↔A TPase ADP  +Pi +H+ +Ener gy     (3.1)
where ADP represents adenosine diphosphate  (only two
phosphate groups, figure 3.1), Pi is an inorganic phosphate
molecule, and H+ is a hydrogen ion (proton). Further hydrolysis of
ADP cleaves the second phosphate group and yields adenosine
monophosphate (AMP) . The energy released primari ly from the
hydrolysis of ATP and secondarily from ADP results in biological
work.
ATP is classified as a high-ener gy molecule because it stores large
amounts of energy in the chemical bonds of the two terminal
phosphate groups. Because muscle cells store ATP only in limited
amounts and activity requires a constant supply of ATP to provide
177
the energy needed for muscle actions, ATP-pr oducing processes
must oc cur in the cel l.
178
Biological Energy Systems
Three basic energy systems  exist in mammal ian muscle cells to
replenish A TP (87 , 124):
Phosphagen
Glycolytic
Oxidativ e
In discussion of exercise-r elated bioener getics, the terms
anaer obic and aerobic metabol ism are often used. Anaerobic
processes do not require the presence of oxygen, whereas aerobic
mechanisms depend on oxygen. The phosphagen  and glycolytic
systems  are anaer obic mechanisms that occur in the sarcoplasm of
a muscle cell. The Krebs cycle , electron transport, and the rest of
the oxidative system are aerobic mechanisms that occur in the
mitochondria  of muscle cells and require oxygen as the terminal
electr on ac ceptor .
Of the three main macronutrients—carboh ydrate, protein, and
fats—only carboh ydrate can be metabol ized for energy without the
direct involvement of oxygen (21). Therefore, carboh ydrate is critical
during anaerobic metabol ism. All three energy systems are active at
any given time; howev er, the magni tude of the contribution of each
system to overall work performance is primari ly dependent on the
intensi ty of the activi ty and secondari ly on the dur ation (45, 87).
Energy stored in the chemical bonds of aden osine
triphosphate (ATP) is used to power muscular activity.
The replenishment of ATP in human skeletal muscle is
accomplished by three basic energy systems: (a)
phosphagen, (b) glycolytic, and (c) oxidative. The first
few seconds of activity are supplied by ATP stores
before these metabolic energy systems begin the
process of replenishing ATP stores and meeting  the
activity demands.
179
Phosphagen System
The phosphagen system provides ATP primari ly for short-term, high-
intensi ty activities (e.g., resistance training and sprinting) and is
highly active at the start of all exercise regardless of intensi ty (62,
70, 155). This energy system relies on the hydrolysis of ATP
(equation 3.1) and breakdown of another high-ener gy phosphate
molecule called creatine phosphate (CP), also called
phosphocreatine (PCr) . Creatine kinase is the enzym e that
catalyz es the synthesis of ATP from CP and ADP in the following
reaction:
 ADP + CP ↔Creatine kinase  ATP + Creatine  (3.2)
180
FIGURE 3.1 (a) The chemical structur e of an ATP molecule showing adenosine (adenine
+ ribose),  the triphosphate group, and locations of the high-ener gy chemical bonds.  (b)
The hydrolysis of ATP breaks the terminal phosphate bond, releases energy, and leaves
ADP, a Pi, and a hydrogen ion (H+). (c) The hydrolysis of ADP breaks the terminal
phosphate bond, r eleases ener gy, and lea ves AMP , Pi, and H+.
181
CP supplies a phosphate group that combines with ADP to
replenish ATP. The creatine kinase reaction provides energy at a high
rate; however, because CP is stored in relatively small amounts, the
phosphagen system cannot be the primary supplier of energy for
continuous, long-dur ation activi ties (30).
ATP Stores
The body stores approximate ly 80 to 100 grams (about 3 oz) of ATP
at any given time, which does not represent a significant energy
reserv e for exercise (109). In addition, ATP stores cannot be
completely depleted due to the necessi ty for basic cellular function.
In fact, ATP concentr ations may only decrease by up to 50% to 60%
(34, 71, 102, 145) of the pre-exercise levels during experimental ly
induced muscle fatigue. Therefore, the phosphagen system uses the
creatine kinase reaction (equation 3.2) to maintain the ATP
concentr ation. Under normal circumstances, skeletal muscle
concentr ations of CP are four to six times higher than ATP
concentr ations (109). Therefore, the phosphagen system, through
CP and the creatine kinase reaction, serves as an energy reserv e for
rapidly replenishing ATP. In addition, type II (fast-twitch) muscle
fibers contain higher concent rations of CP than type I (slow-twitch)
fibers (95, 134); thus, individuals with higher percentages of type II
fibers may be able to replenish ATP more quickly through the
phosphagen system during anaer obic, explosiv e exercise.
Another important single-enzyme reaction that can rapidly
replenish ATP is the adenylate kinase  (also called myokinase )
reaction :
2ADP↔Aden ylate kinaseA TP +AMP     (3.3)
This reaction is particularly important because AMP, a product of the
adenylate kinase (myokinase) reaction, is a powerf ul stimulant of
glycolysis  (22, 28).
182
Control of the Phosphagen System
The phosphagen system reactions (often represented by equations
3.1, 3.2, and 3.3) are largely controlled by the law of mass action
or the mass action effect  (109). The law of mass action states
that the concentr ations of reactants or products (or both) in solution
will drive the direction of the reactions. With enzyme-mediated
reactions, such as the reactions of the phosphagen system, the rate
of product formation is greatly influenced by the reactant
concentr ations. This is denote d in equations 3.1, 3.2, and 3.3 by the
two-way arrow between reactants and products. For example, as
ATP is hydrolyzed to yield the energy necessary for exercise
(equation 3.1), there is a transient increase in ADP concentrations
(as well as Pi) in the sarcolemma. This will increase the rate of
creatine kinase and adenylate kinase reaction (equations 3.2 and
3.3) to replenish the ATP supply . The process will continue until the
exercise ceases or the intensi ty reduces such that it does not deplete
CP stores and thus glycolysis or the oxidativ e system can become
the primary supplier of ATP and rephosphorylate the free creatine
(equation 3.2) (37). At this point, the sarcoplasmic concentr ation of
ATP will remain steady or increase, which will slow down  or reverse
the directions of the creatine  kinase and adenylate kinase reactions.
As a result, equations 3.1, 3.2, and 3.3 are often referred to as
near-equilibrium reactions  that proceed in a direction dictated by
the concentr ations of the r eactants due to the la w of mass action.
Glycolytic System
Glycolysis is the breakdown  of carboh ydrate—ei ther as glycogen
stored in the muscle or glucose delivered via the blood—to
resynthesiz e ATP (22, 145). The process of glycolysis involves
multiple enzymatical ly catalyz ed reactions (figure 3.2). As a result,
the ATP resynt hesis rate during glycolysis is not as rapid as with the
single-step phosphagen system; howev er, the capaci ty to produce
ATP is much higher due to a larger supply of glycogen and glucose
183
compar ed to CP. As with the phosphagen system, glycolysis occurs in
the sar coplasm.
As depicted in figure 3.2, pyruvate , the end result of glycolysis,
may proceed in one of two dir ections:
1. Pyruv ate can be con verted to lactate  in the sar coplasm.
2. Pyruv ate can be shut tled into the mi tochondria.
When pyruvate is converted to lactate, ATP resynthesis occurs at
a faster rate via the rapid regener ation of NAD+ but is limited in
duration due to subsequent H+ production resulting in decreased
cytosol ic pH. Howev er, the excess H+ does not primarily result from
the rapid hydrolysis of ATP during the conversion of pyruvate to
lactate; it is the breakdown of ATP to ADP and Pi, which releases H+
ions. The conversion process of pyruvate to lactate is often called
anaerobic glycolysis  (or fast glycolysis ). Howev er, when
pyruvate is shuttled into the mitochondria to under go the Krebs
cycle, the ATP resynthesis rate is slower because of the numer ous
reactions but can occur for a longer duration if the exercise intensi ty
is low enoug h. This process is often referred to as aerobic
glycolysis  (or slow glycoly sis). At higher exercise intens ities,
pyruvate and NADH will increase above what can be handled by
pyruvate dehydrogenase and will then be converted into lactate and
NAD+. Unfortunately , because glycolysis itself does not depend on
oxygen, the terms anaer obic and aerobic (or fast and slow,
respectiv ely) glycolysis  are probably not practical for describing the
processes. Nevertheless, the fate of pyruvate is ultimately controlled
by the energy demands within the cell. If energy demand is high and
must be transferred quickly , as in resistance training, pyruvate is
primari ly converted to lactate in support of anaer obic glycolysis. If
energy deman d is not as high and oxygen is present in sufficient
quanti ties in the cell, pyruvate can be further oxidized in the
mitochondria.
184
FIGURE 3.2 Gly colysis. ADP = adenosine diphos phate; ATP = adenosine triphosphate;
NAD+, NADH = nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide.
Glycolysis and the Formation of Lactate
The formation of lactate from pyruvate is catalyz ed by the enzyme
lactate dehydrogenase. Sometimes, mistak enly, the end result of this
reaction is said to be the formation of lactic acid. However, due to
the physiological pH (i.e., near 7) and earlier steps in glycolysis that
185
consume protons (125), lactate—r ather than lactic acid—is the
product of the lactate dehydrogenase reaction. Although the
muscular fatigue experienced  during exercise often correlates with
high tissue concentr ations of lactate, lactate is not the cause of
fatigue (22, 27, 125). Proton (H+) accumulation during fatigue
reduces the intracellular pH, inhibi ts glycolytic reactions, and directly
interferes with muscle’ s excitation–contr action coupl ing—possibly by
inhibi ting calcium binding to troponin (57, 115) or by interfering with
crossbridge recycling (51, 57, 79, 115, 146). Also, the decrease in
pH inhibi ts the enzymatic turno ver rate of the cell’s energy systems
(9, 78). Overall, this process  of an exercise-induced decrease in pH
is referred to as metabolic acidosis  (125), and may be responsible
for much of the peripher al fatigue that occurs during exercise (42,
156). Also, the role of metabol ic acidosis in peripher al fatigue has
been questioned (130), and other factors have been reported to play
a prominent role in peripher al fatigue, such as an increased
intersti tial K+ concentr ation and Pi that impairs Ca++ release (120,
139). Howev er, evidence suggests that other mechanisms, such as
the simple hydrolysis of ATP (125) (equation 3.1), are responsible for
most of the H+ accumulation and that lactate itself actual ly works to
decrease metabolic acidosis rather than accelerate it (27, 125). See
the sidebar Lactic Acid Does Not Cause Metabol ic Acidosis . In fact,
lactate is often used as an energy subst rate, especial ly in type I
and cardiac muscle fibers (10, 108, 162). It is also used in
gluconeogenesis  (i.e., the Cori cycle )—the formatio n of glucose
from noncarboh ydrate sources, lactate in this case—during  extended
exercise and r ecovery (19, 108).
Normal ly, blood and muscle have a low concentr ation of lactate.
The reported normal range of lactate concentr ation in blood is 0.5 to
2.2 mmol/L at rest (67) and 0.5 to 2.2 mmol for each kilogram of
wet muscle  (muscle that has not been desiccated) (67). Lactate
production increases with exercise intensi ty (67, 129) and appears to
depend on muscle fiber type. Resear chers have reported that the
maximal rate of lactate production for type II muscle fibers is 0.5
186
mmol · g−1 · s−1 (46, 107) and for type I muscle is 0.25 mmol · g−1 ·
s−1 (113). The higher rate of lactate production by type II muscle
fibers may reflect a higher concentr ation or activity of glycolytic
enzymes than in type I muscle fibers (10, 122). Although the highest
possible concentr ation of lactate accumulation is not known, severe
fatigue may occur at blood  concentr ations between 20 and 25
mmol/L (107); one study, howev er, showed blood lactate
concentr ations greater than 30 mmol/L following multiple bouts of
dynamic exercise (79). Along with exercise intensi ty and muscle fiber
type, exercise duration (67), state of training (66), and initial
glycogen lev els (67) can also influence lactate ac cumulation.
Blood lactate concentr ations reflect the net balance of lactate
production versus clearance as a result of bicarbonate (HCO 3−)
buffering. HCO 3− minimiz es the disrupting influence of the H+ on pH
by accepting a proton (H+) and becoming carbonic acid (H2CO3).
Carbonic acid then dissociate s to H2O and CO2 in the lungs, where
the CO2 is exhaled. The clearance and buffering of lactate from the
blood reflects a return to homeostatic resting level. Lactate can be
cleared by oxidation within the muscle fiber in which it was
produced, or it can be transported in the blood to other muscle
fibers to be oxidized (108). Lactate can also be transpo rted in the
blood to the liver, where it is converted to glucose. This process is
referred to as the Cori cycle  and is depicted in figure 3.3.
Gollnick and colleagues (67) and others (8, 72, 118) have
reported that blood lactate concentr ations normal ly return to pre-
exercise values within an hour after activity, depending on the
duration and intensi ty of exercise, training status, and type of
recovery (i.e., passiv e versus active). Light activity during the
postex ercise period has been shown to increase lactate clearance
rates (55, 67, 72, 80, 118). For example, an active recovery
following a 200-yard (182.9 m) maximal-ef fort swim resulted in the
greatest lactat e clearance in comparison to a passiv e recovery in
competi tive swimmers (72). In addition, both aerobical ly trained (67)
and anaer obical ly trained (62) athletes have faster lactate clearance
187
rates than untrained people. Peak blood lactate concentr ations occur
approximately 5 minutes after the cessation of exercise (67), a delay
frequently attributed to the time required to buffer and transport
lactate from the tissue to the blood (95). Hence, lactate clearance
should be recogniz ed positively as an indirect marker for recovery
from metabol ic acidosis as the system returns to metabol ic
homeostasis and not as w aste pr oduct of metabol ism.
FIGURE 3.3  The Cori cy cle.
Blood lactate accumulation is greater following high-i ntensi ty,
intermi ttent exercise (e.g., resistance training and sprints) than
following lower -intensi ty, continuous exercise (79, 103, 152).
Howev er, trained people experience lower blood lactate
concentr ations than untrained people when exercising at an absolute
workload (same resistance) (66, 90, 143). This indicates that
resistance training results in alterations in lactate response similar to
those from aerobic endur ance training (67, 91, 143). These
alterations include a lower blood lactate concentr ation at a given
workload in trained individuals and higher blood lactate
concentr ations in trained individuals during maximal exercise (67, 90,
143).
188
The net reaction for glycolysis when pyruvate is converted to
lactate ma y be summariz ed as f ollows:
Glucose + 2P i + 2ADP → 2Lactate + 2ATP + H 2O   (3.4)
Lactic Acid Does Not Cause Metabolic
Acidosis
Lactic acidosis is a common misnomer , because lactic acid is inaccurately believed
to cause the burning sensations experienced with muscle fatigue during high-
intensi ty exercise. This is based on the assumption that there is an imme diate
dissociation of lactic acid into lactate and H+ when produced by glycolysis in
skeletal muscle (1, 60, 125). Howev er, the phosphogly cerate kinase reaction of
glycolysis involves the transfer of a phosphate leaving a carbo xylate (COO−) group
(105). Thus, as shown in figure 3.4, no proton (H+) exists to dissociate from
lactate (60, 125).
Figure 3.4  The phosphoglycerate kinase reaction of glycolysis, illustrating
that there is no proton (H+) to dissociate from lactate.
Furthermor e, the lactate dehydrogenase reaction itself consumes protons, which
alkalizes the cell (60, 125)—qui te the opposi te of acidosis. In fact, Busa and
Nuccitelli (27) stated, “ATP hydrolysis, not lactate accumulation, is the dominant
source of the intracellular acid load …” (p. 430). The take-home message from
Robergs and colleagues (125) is that the hydrolysis of ATP outside  the
mitochondria is primari ly responsible for the proton (H+) accumu lation during
exercise-induced metabolic acidosis—not the conversion of pyruvate to lactate as is
commonly believed. Consequently , the term lactic acidosis  is indeed a misnom er,
and the term metabol ic acidosis  is recommended to describe the reduced pH
within sk eletal muscle during high-intensi ty, fatiguing ex ercise.
189
Glycolysis Leading to the Krebs Cycle
If oxygen is present in sufficient quanti ties in the mitochondria
(special ized cellular organel les where the reactions of aerobic
metabol ism occur), the end product of glycolysis, pyruvate, is not
converted to lactate but is transported into the mitochondria. Also
transported are two molecul es of reduced nicotinamide adenine
dinucleotide (NADH)  produced during glycolytic reactions
(reduced  refers to the added hydrogen). When pyruvate enters the
mitochondria, it is converted to acetyl-CoA (CoA stands for
coenzyme A) by the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex, resulting in
the loss of a carbon as CO2. Acetyl-CoA can then enter the Krebs
cycle for further ATP resynthesis. The NADH molecules drop off H+ at
the electron transport chain, where they can also be used to
resynthesiz e ATP.
The net reaction for glycolysis when pyruvate is shuttled to the
mitochondria ma y be summariz ed as f ollows:
Glucose + 2P i + 2ADP + 2NAD+ → 2Pyruvate + 2ATP + 2NADH + 2H 2O    
(3.5)
Energy Yield of Glycolysis
There are two primary mechanisms for resynthesizing ATP during
metabol ism:
1. Substr ate-lev el phosphorylation
2. Oxidativ e phosphorylation
Phosphorylation  is the process of adding a Pi to another
molecule. For example, ADP + Pi → ATP is the phosphorylati on of
ADP to ATP. Oxidative phosphorylation  refers to the resynthesis
of ATP in the electron transport chain (ETC) . In contrast,
substrate-level phosphory lation  refers to the direct resynthesis
of ATP from ADP during a single reaction in the metabol ic pathways.
To illustrate, in glycolysis two reactions result in substr ate-lev el
phosphorylation of ADP to A TP (42):
190
         1,3-bisphosphogly cerate + ADP + P  i→Phosphogly cerate kinase   3-
phosphogly cerate + A TP  (3.6)
Phosphoenolp yruvate + ADP++ Pi→Pyruv ate kinasePyruv ate + ATP  (3. 7)
The gross number of ATP molecules that are resynthesiz ed as a
result of substr ate-lev el phosphorylation during glycolysis is four
(figure 3.2, page 57). Howe ver, the reaction that converts fructose-
6-phosphate to fructose-1,6- bisphosphate (catalyz ed by the enzyme
phosphofructokinase [PFK] ) in glycolysis requires the hydrolysis
of one ATP molecule. In addition, there are two possible sources of
glucose: blood glucose and muscle glycogen. When blood glucose
enters the muscle cell, it must be phosphorylated to remain in the
cell and to maintain the glucose concentr ation gradient  (67). The
phosphorylation of one molec ule of blood glucose, which is catalyz ed
by hexokinase,  also requires the hydrolysis of one ATP. In contrast,
when muscle glycogen is broken down (i.e., glycogenolysis ) to
glucose with the help of the enzyme glycogen phosphorylase, the
glucose is already phosphorylated, and it does not require the
hydrolysis of ATP. The bottom line is that when glycolysis begins with
one molecule of blood glucos e, two ATP molecules are used and four
ATP are resynthesiz ed, which  results in a net resynthesis of two ATP
molecules. When glycolysis begins from muscle glycogen, only one
ATP is used and four ATP are resynthesiz ed, which yields a net
resynthesis of three ATP molecules. The net yield rate of ATP
resynthesis highlights the role and importance of maintaining muscle
glycogen stor es thr ough pr oper nutri tion.
Control of Glycolysis
In general, the rate of glycolysis is stimulated to increase during
intense muscl e actions by high concentr ations of ADP, Pi, and
ammonia and by a slight decrease in pH and AMP (22, 61, 142), all
of which are signs of increased ATP hydrolysis and a need for
energy. In contrast, glycolysis is inhibi ted by markedly lower pH,
ATP, CP, citrate, and increased free fatty acids (22), which are
usually present at rest. (Note that a slight decrease in pH increases
191
glycolysis, but if pH continues to decrease significantly it will inhibi t
the rate of glycolysis. ) Howev er, the regulation of glycolysis (109) is
more specifically influenced by the concentr ations and turno ver rates
of three crucial glycolytic enzymes: hexokinase, PFK, and pyruvate
kinase. All three are regulatory enzymes in glycolysis, because each
has important allosteric (meaning “other site”) binding sites.
Allosteric regulation occurs when the end product of a reaction or
series of reactions feeds back to regulate the turno ver rate of key
enzymes in the metabol ic pathways. Consequently , this process is
also called end product regulation  (87) or feedback regulation  (61).
Allosteric inhibition  occurs when an end product binds to the
regulatory enzyme and decreases its turno ver rate and slows
product format ion. In contrast, allosteric activation  occurs when
an “activ ator” binds wi th the enzyme and incr eases i ts turno ver rate.
Hexokinase, which catalyz es the phosphorylation of glucose to
glucose-6-phosphate, is allosterical ly inhibi ted by the concentration
of glucose-6-phosphate in the sarcoplasm (61). Thus, the higher the
concentr ation of glucose-6-phosphate, the more hexokinase will be
inhibi ted. In addition, the phosphorylation of glucose commi ts it to
the cell so that it cannot leave. Similarly, the PFK reaction (fructose-
6-phosphate → fructose 1,6-bisphosphate) commi ts the cell to
metabol izing glucose rather than storing it as glycogen.
Phosphof ructokinase is the most important regulator of glycolysis
even though it is the slowest reaction of the steps that makes up
glycolysis because it is the bottleneck, or the rate-limiting step.
ATP is an allosteric inhibi tor of PFK; therefore, as intracellular ATP
concentr ations rise, PFK activity decreases and reduces the
conversion of fructose-6-phosphate to fructose 1,6-bisphosphate
and, subsequently , decreases activity of the glycolytic pathway.
Howev er, AMP is an allosteric activator of PFK and a powerf ul
stimulator of glycolysis. Moreover, the ammonia produced during
high-intensi ty exercise as a result of AMP or amino acid deamination
(removing the amine group from the amino acid molecule) can also
stimulate PFK. Pyruv ate kinase catalyz es the conversion of
192
phosphoenolp yruvate to pyruvate and is the final regulatory enzyme.
Pyruv ate kinase is allosterical ly inhibi ted by ATP and acetyl-CoA (the
latter is a Krebs cycle intermediate) and activated by high
concentr ations of AMP and f ructose-1,6-bisphosphate (61).
Lactate Threshold and Onset of Blood Lactate
Accumulation
As exercise intensi ty increases, specific break points are evident in
the lactate accumulation curve (figure 3.5), indirectly representing
the change in metabol ic acidosis (39, 99). The exercise intensi ty or
relative intensi ty at which blood lactate begins an abrupt increase
above the baseline concentr ation has been termed the lactate
threshold (LT) or (LT1)  (163). The LT represents a significantly
increased reliance on the glycolytic pathway for energy production to
meet demand. The LT corresponds well with the ventilatory
threshold (breaking point in the relationship between ventilation and
V̇O2) and is often used as a mark er of the anaer obic thr eshold.
The LT typical ly begins at 50% to 60% of maximal oxygen
uptake  in untrained individuals and at 70% to 80% in aerobical ly
trained athletes (29, 52). A second exponential increase in the rate
of lactate accumulation has been noted at higher relative intensi ties
of exercise. This second point of inflection has been termed the
onset of blood lactate accumulation (OBLA)  or lactate
threshold (LT2) and occurs approximately when the concentr ation
of blood  lactate reaches 4 mmol/L (85, 138, 144). Alternativ ely, the
LT2 threshold can be calcula ted, with the Dmax modified method
reported to have the highest repeatabi lity (81). The breaks in the
lactate accumu lation curve may correspond to the points at which
intermediate and large motor units are recruited during increasing
exercise intensi ties (94). The muscle cells associated with large
motor units are typical ly type II fibers, which are particularly suited
for anaer obic metabol ism and lactate pr oduction.
193
FIGURE 3.5  Lactate thr eshold (L T) and onset of blood lactate ac cumulation (OBL A).
Reprinted by permission from T.O. Bompa and G.G. Haff, Periodization: Theory and Methodology of Training, 5th ed.
(Human Kinetics, 2009), 295.
Some studies suggest that training at intensi ties near or above
the LT or OBLA pushes the LT and OBLA to the right (i.e., lactate
accumulation occurs later at a higher exercise intensi ty) (39, 43).
This shift probably occurs as a result of changes in hormone release,
particularly reduced catecholamine release at high exercise
intensi ties, and increased mitochondrial content that allows for
greater production of ATP through aerobic mechanisms. Broadly, the
training-induced adaptations result in the athlete being able to rely
more on free fatty acids to meet the ATP demands of the exercise
task. Thus shifting the LT or OBLA to the right allows the athlete to
perform at higher percentages of maximal oxygen uptak e without as
194
much lactate accumulation (change in metabol ic acidosis) in the
blood (22, 41).
The Oxid ative (Aerobic) System
The oxidative system, the primary source of ATP at rest and during
low-intensi ty activities, uses primari ly carboh ydrate and fats as
substr ates (62). Protein does not provide a significant contribution to
total energy; however, the use of protein does significantly increase
during long-term starvation and long bouts (>90 min) of exercise
(41, 104). At rest, approximately 70% of the ATP produced is
derived from fats and 30% from carboh ydrate. Following the onset
of activity, as the intensi ty of the exercise increases, there is a shift
in substr ate preference from fats to carboh ydrate. During high-
intensi ty aerobic exercise, almost 100% of energy is derived from
carboh ydrate if an adequate  supply is available, with only minimal
contributions from fats and protein. Howev er, during prolonged,
submaximal, steady -state work, there is a gradual shift from
carboh ydrate back to fats (due to glycogen depletion), and to a very
small extent pr otein, as ener gy substr ates (22).
Glucose and Glycogen Oxidation
The oxidativ e metabol ism of blood glucose and muscle glycogen
begins with glycolysis. If oxygen is present in sufficient quanti ties,
the end product of glycolysis, pyruvate, is not converted to lactate
but is transported to the mitochondria, where it is converted to
acetyl-CoA (a two-carbon molecule), which enters the Krebs cycle,
also known as the citric acid cycle or tricarbo xylic acid cycle (7, 61).
The Krebs cycle is a series of reactions that continues the oxidation
of the substr ate from glycolysis and produces two ATP indirectly
from guanine triphosphate (GTP), via substrate-lev el
phosphorylation, f or each molecule of glucose ( figure 3.6).
195
FIGURE 3.6 The Krebs cycle. CoA = coenzyme A; FAD2+, FADH, FADH 2 = flavin adenine
dinucleotide; GDP = guanine diphosphate; GTP = guanine triphosphate; NAD+, NADH =
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide.
Also produced from the two pyruvate molecules subsequent to
the production of one molecule of glucose are six molecules of
NADH + H+ and two molecules of reduced flavin adenine
dinucleotide (FADH 2). These molecules transport hydrogen atoms
to the ETC to be used to produce ATP from ADP (22, 109). The ETC
uses the NADH + H+ and FADH 2 molecules to rephosphorylate ADP
to ATP (figure 3.7).
196
FIGURE 3.7  The electr on transport chain (ET C). CoQ = coenzyme Q; Cyt = cytochr ome.
The hydrogen atoms are passed down the chain (a series of
electr on carriers known as cytochromes ) to form a proton
concentr ation gradient, which provides the energy for ATP
production, with oxygen serving as the final electr on acceptor
(resulting in the formation of water). Due to NADH + H+ and FADH 2
entering the ETC at different sites, they differ in the amount of ATP
produced. One molecule of NADH can produce 2.5 molecules of ATP,
whereas one molecule of FADH 2 can only produce 1.5 molecules of
ATP (however, traditional biochemistry often cites that NADH yields 3
ATP and FADH 2 yields 2 ATP [34a]). The production of ATP during
this process is referred to as oxidativ e phosphorylation . The
oxidativ e system, beginning with glycolysis and including the Krebs
cycle and ETC, results in the production of approximately 32 ATP
from the degradation of one molecule of blood glucose (12a, 117a).
Howev er, if the initiation of glycolysis is muscle glycogen, the net
ATP production is slightly higher at 34 ATP, using the malate-
aspartate shuttle system or 32 ATP using the glycerol 3-phosphate
shuttle system  because the first ATP consuming step in glycolysis is
bypassed (12a, 117a). Nevertheless, oxidativ e phosphorylation
accounts for over 90% of ATP synthesis compar ed to substrate-lev el
phosphorylation, which demonstr ates the capaci ty of energy transfer
by the oxidativ e system. See table 3.1 for a summa ry of these
processes.
TABLE 3.1  Total Energy Yield From the Oxidation of
One Glucose Molecule
Process Net ATP production
197
Process Net ATP production
GLYCOLYSIS
Substr ate-lev el phosphorylation (4 A TP pr oduced / 2 A TP
consumed)2*
Oxidativ e phosphorylation:
2 NADH (2.5 A TP each)5
PYRUVATE OXIDATION
2 NADH (2.5 A TP each) 5
KREBS CYCLE (2 ROTATIONS THROUGH THE KREBS CYCLE PER GLUCOSE)
Substr ate-lev el phosphorylation 2
Oxidativ e phosphorylation:
6 NADH (2.5 A TP each)15
Via GTP:
2 FADH 2 (1.5 A TP each)3
TOTAL 32
*Glycolysis consumes 2 ATP (if starting with blood glucose), so net ATP production is 34 −
2 = 32. This figure may also be reported as 30 ATP or as high as 36 depending on which
shuttle system is used to transport the NADH to the mitochondria. ATP = adenosine
triphosphate; FADH2 = flavin adenine dinucleotide; GTP = guanine triphosphate; NADH =
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide.
Fat Oxidation
The oxidativ e energy system can alternativ ely use fats. Triglycerides
stored in fat cells can be broken down by an enzyme,  hormone-
sensitive lipase, to produce free fatty acids and glycerol. The
breakdown releases a portion of the total free fatty acids from the
fat cells into the blood, where they can circulate and enter muscle
fibers and under go oxidation (89, 123). Additional ly, limited
quanti ties of triglycerides are stored within the muscle along with a
form of hormone-sensi tive lipase to produce an intramuscular source
of free fatty acids (22, 47). Free fatty acids enter the mitochondria,
where they under go beta oxidatio n, a series of reactions in which
the free fatty acids are broken down, resulting in the formation of
198
acetyl-CoA and hydrogen protons (figure 3.6). The acetyl-CoA is a
common intermediary entering the Krebs cycle directly, and the
hydrogen atoms are carried by NADH + H+ and FADH 2 to the ETC
(12a, 117a). The result is hundr eds of ATP molecules supplied by
beta oxidation. For example, the breakdown of a single triglyceride
molecule containing three 16-carbon chain free fatty acids (palmi tic
acid) can be metabol ized by beta oxidation to yield over 300 ATP
molecules (>100 ATP per palmi tic acid). The overarching concept is
that fat oxidation is capable of a tremendous capaci ty for ATP
synthesis compar ed to carboh ydrate and pr otein o xidation.
Protein Oxidation
Although not a significant source of energy for most activities,
protein can be broken down into its consti tuent amino acids by
various metabol ic processes. Most of these amino acids can then be
converted into glucose (in a process known as gluconeogenesis ),
pyruvate, or various Krebs cycle intermediates to produce ATP
(figure 3.6). The contribution of amino acids to the production of
ATP has been estimated to be minimal during short-term exercise
but may contribute 3% to 18% of the energy requirements during
prolonged activity (20, 140). The major amino acids that are
oxidized in skeletal muscle are believed to be the branched-chain
amino acids  (leucine, isoleucine, and valine), although alanine,
aspartate, and glutamate may also be used (69). The nitrogenous
waste products of amino acid degradation are eliminated through
the formation of urea and small amounts of ammonia (22). The
elimination through formation of ammonia is significant because
ammonia is to xic and is associated wi th fatigue.
Control of the Oxidative (Aerobic) System
The rate-limiting step (i.e., the slowest reaction) in the Krebs cycle
(figure 3.6) is the conversion of isocitrate to α-ketoglutar ate, a
reaction catalyz ed by the enzyme isocitrate dehydrogenase.
Isocitrate dehydrogenase is stimulated by ADP and allosterical ly
199
inhibi ted by ATP. The reactions that produce NADH + H+ or FADH 2
also influence the regulation of the Krebs cycle. If NAD+ and FAD2+
are not available in sufficient quanti ties to accept hydrogen, the rate
of the Krebs cycle is reduced. Also, when GTP accumulates, the
concentr ation of succinyl CoA increases, which inhibi ts the initial
reaction (oxaloacetate + acetyl-CoA → citrate + CoA) of the Krebs
cycle. The ETC is inhibi ted by ATP and stimulated by ADP (22). A
simplified overview of the metabol ism of fat, carboh ydrate, and
protein is pr esented in figure 3.8.
FIGURE 3.8 The metabolism of fat and that of carboh ydrate and protein share some
common path ways. Note that man y are oxidized to acet yl-CoA and enter the Kr ebs cy cle.
Energy Production and Capacity
The phosphagen, glycolytic, and oxidativ e energy systems differ in
their ability to supply energy for activities of various intensities and
durations (tables 3.2 and 3.3). Exercise intensi ty is often defined in
200
terms of mech anical power (which is the rate of doing work) as an
overall measur e of the external power flow required to achiev e a
desired level of muscular activity output (100). Activi ties performed
at relatively high intensi ty for very short durations,  such as
resistance training, require a rapid rate of energy supply and rely
almost entirely on energy provided by the phosphagen system.
Activi ties that are of low intensi ty but long duration, such as
marathon running, require a prolonged energy supply and rely
predominantly on the energy supplied by the oxidativ e energy
system. The primary source of energy for activities between these
two extremes depends on the intensi ty and duration of the event
(table 3.2). In gener al, short, high-intensi ty activities (e.g., high-
intensi ty resistance training and sprinting) rely largely on the
phosphagen energy system and glycolysis under anaer obic
condi tions whereby pyruvate is primari ly converted to lactate,
commonly referred to as fast glycolysis. As the intensi ty decreases
and duration increases, the emphasis gradual ly shifts to slow
glycolysis and the o xidativ e ener gy system (45, 131).
TABLE 3.2  Effect of Event Duration and Intensity on
Primary Energy System Used
Duration of event Intensity of event Primary energy system
0-6 s Extremely high Phosphagen
6-30 s Very high Phosphagen and f ast gly colysis
30 s to 2 min High Fast gly colysis
2-3 min Moder ate Slow gly colysis and o xidativ e system
>3 min Low Oxidativ e system
Note:  The relationships between duration, intensi ty, and primary energy systems used
assume that the athlete striv es to at tain the best possible perf ormance f or a giv en ev ent.
TABLE 3.3  Rankings of Rate and Capacity of ATP
Production
201
System Rate of ATP production Capacity of ATP production
Phosphagen 1 5
Fast gly colysis 2 4
Slow gly colysis 3 3
Oxidation of carboh ydrates 4 2
Oxidation of f ats and pr oteins 5 1
Note:  1 = fastest/gr eatest; 5 = slowest/least.
In general, an inverse relationship exists between a
given energy system’s maximum rate of ATP production
(i.e., ATP produced per unit of time) and its capacity
(i.e., the total amount of ATP produced over time). The
phosphagen system is capable of achieving the highest
rate of ATP production, while fat oxidation through the
oxidative system has the greatest capacity of ATP
production. As a result, the phosphagen energy system
primarily supplies ATP for high-intensity activities of
short duration (e.g., 100 m sprint), the glycolytic system
for moderate- to high-in tensity activities of short to
medium duration (e.g., 400 m dash), and the oxidative
system for low-intensity activities of long duration (e.g.,
marathon).
The duration of the activity also influences which energy system is
used. Athletic events range in duration from 1 to 3 seconds (e.g.,
snatch and shot put) to more than 4 hours (e.g., long-distance
triathlons and ultramarathons ). If an athlete makes a best effort (an
effort that results in the best possible performance for a given
event), the time consider ations shown in table 3.2 are reasonable
(48, 79, 126, 146, 149).
At no time, during either exercise or rest, does any single energy
system provide the complete supply of energy. During exercise, the
202
degree to which anaer obic and oxidativ e systems contrib ute to the
energy being produced is determined primari ly by the exercise
intensi ty and secondari ly by exercise dur ation (22, 45, 48).
The extent to which each of the three energy systems
contributes to ATP production depends primarily on the
intensity of muscular activity and secondarily on the
duration. At no time, during either exercise or rest, does
any single energy system provide the complete supply of
energy.
203
Substrate Depletion and Repletion
Energy substr ates—molecules that provide starting materials for
bioener getic reactions, including phosphagens (ATP and CP),
glucose, glycogen, lactate, free fatty acids, and amino acids—can be
selectiv ely depleted during the performance of activities of various
intensi ties and durations. Subsequently , the energy that can be
produced by the bioener getic systems is reduced. Fatigue
experienced during many activities is frequently associated with the
depletion of phosphagens (66, 89) and glycogen (21, 79, 92, 133).
Importantly , performance is rarely limited by the depletion of
substr ates such as free fatty acids, lactate, and amino acids.
Consequently , the depletion  and repletion  pattern of phosphagens
and glycogen following physical activity is important in exercise and
sport bioener getics.
Phosphagens
Fatigue during exercise appears to be at least partial ly related to the
decrease in phosphagens (i.e., ATP and CP). Phosphagen
concentr ations in muscle are more rapidly depleted as a result of
high-intensi ty anaerobic exercise compar ed to aerobic exercise (66,
89). CP can decrease markedly (50%-70%) during the first stage of
high-intensi ty exercise of short and moder ate duration (5-30 s) and
can be almost completely depleted as a result of very intense
exercise to exhaustion (86, 93, 97, 110). Muscle ATP concentr ations
may decrease only slightly (34) or may decrease up to 50% to 60%
(145) of the pre-exercise levels during experimental ly induced
fatigue. It should also be noted that dynamic muscle actions that
produce external work use more metabol ic energy and typical ly
deplete phosphagens to a greater extent than do isometric muscle
actions (18).
The intramuscular ATP concentration is largely sustained  during
exercise as a consequence of CP depletion and the contribution of
additional ATP from the myokinase reaction and oxidatio n of other
204
energy sources, such as glycogen and free fatty acids. Postexercise
phosphagen repletion can occur in a relatively short period, with
complete ATP resynthesis occurring within approximately 3 to 5
minutes, and CP being fully resynthesiz ed within 8 minutes (75, 89).
Note that half of the CP stores are replenished in 30 seconds,
allowing for repeated maximal contractions interspersed  with brief
rest intervals. While repletion of phosphagens is largely
accompl ished as a result of aerobic metabol ism (75), glycolysis can
contribute to r ecovery after high-intensi ty exercise (29, 40).
The effects of training and supplementation on resting
concentr ations of phosphagens is an ongoing area of investigation.
Aerobic endur ance training may increase resting concentr ations of
phosphagens (49, 99) and decrease their rate of depletion at a given
absolute submaximal power output (33, 99) but not at a relative
(percentage of maximum) submaximal power output (33). Although
resear chers have reported indications of increased resting
concentr ations of phosphagens (12, 127), short-term (eight weeks)
studies of sprint and six months of resistance or explosiv e training
have not shown alterations in resting concentr ations of phosphagens
(11, 16, 147, 150). Howev er, total phosphagen content can be larger
following sprint training due to increases in muscle mass (150).
Resistance training has been shown to increase the resting
concentr ations of phosphagens in the triceps brachii after five weeks
of training (106). The increases in phosphagen concentr ation are
likely due to selectiv e hypertr ophy of type II fibers, which are
reported to contain a higher  phosphagen concentr ation than type I
fibers (105).
Glycogen
Limited stores of glycogen are available for exercise. Approximately
300 to 400 grams (11-14 oz) of glycogen are stored in the body’s
total muscle and about 70 to 100 grams (2-4 oz) in the liver (137).
Resting concentr ations of liver and muscle glycogen can be
influenced by training and dietary manipulations (56, 137). Resear ch
205
suggests that both anaer obic training, including sprinting and
resistance training (16, 106), and aerobic endur ance training (64,
65) can increase resting muscle glycogen concentr ation with
concomi tantly appr opriate nutri tion.
The rate of glycogen depletion is related to exercise intensi ty
(137). Muscle glycogen is a more important energy source than liver
glycogen during moder ate- and high-intensi ty exercise. Liver
glycogen appears to be more important during low-intensi ty
exercise, and its contribution to metabol ic processes increases with
duration of exercise. Increases in relative exercise intensi ty of 50%,
75%, and 100% of maximal oxygen uptak e result in increases in the
rate of muscle  glycogenolysi s (the breakdown of glycogen) of 0.7,
1.4, and 3.4 mmol · kg−1 · min−1, respectiv ely (133). At relative
intensi ties of exercise above 60% of maximal oxygen uptak e, muscle
glycogen becomes an increasingly important energy substr ate; the
entire glycogen  content of some muscle cells can become depleted
during ex ercise (132).
Relatively constant blood glucose concentr ations are maintained
at very low exercise intensi ties (<50% of maximal oxygen uptak e)
because of low muscle glucose uptak e. Howev er, as exercise
duration increases beyond 90 minutes, blood glucose concentrations
fall but rarely below 2.8 mmol/L (2). Long-dur ation exercise (>90
min) at higher intensi ties (>50% of maximal oxygen uptak e) may
result in substantial ly decreased blood glucose concentr ations as a
result of liver glycogen depletion. Hypogly cemic reactions may occur
in some people with exercise-induced blood glucose values less than
2.5 mmol/L (3, 35). Reduced liver carboh ydrate stores cause a
decline in blood glucose to approximately 2.5 to 3.0 mmol/L,
resulting in diminished carboh ydrate oxidation and eventual
exhaustion (32, 35, 137). Howev er, before exhaustion occurs, it is
important to note that other ATP sources are converted to glucose
through gluconeogenesis, with free fatty acids becoming the
predominant f uel sour ce.
206
Very high-intensi ty, intermi ttent exercise, such as high-intensi ty
resistance training, can cause substantial depletion of muscle
glycogen (decreases of 20%-60%) with relatively few sets (low total
volume) (100, 126, 146, 148). Although phosphagens may be the
primary limiting factor during resistance exercise with high
resistance and few repetitions or few sets, muscle glycogen may
become the limiting factor for resistance training with larger volumes
of work accumulated using many sets and repetitions (126). This
type of exercise could cause selectiv e muscle fiber glycogen
depletion (more depletion in type II fibers), which can also limit
performance (50, 126). As with other types of dynamic exercise, the
rate of muscle glycogenolysis during resistance exercise depends on
intensi ty (i.e., the greater the intensi ty, the faster the rate of
glycogenolysis). Howev er, it appears that when the total work
performed is equal, the absolute amount of glycogen depletion is
similar, regardless of the resistance training session’ s intensi ty (69,
126).
Repletion of muscle glycogen during recovery is related to
postex ercise carbohydrate ingestion. Repletion appears to be optimal
if 0.7 to 3.0 grams of carboh ydrate per kilogram of body weight is
ingested every 2 hours following exercise (56, 137). This level of
carboh ydrate consumption can maximiz e muscle glycogen repletion
at 5 to 6 mmol/g of wet muscle mass per hour during the first 4 to 6
hours following exercise. Muscle glycogen may be completely
replenished within 24 hours, provided that sufficient carboh ydrate is
ingested (56, 137). Howev er, if the exercise has a high eccentric
component (associated with exercise-induced muscle damage), more
time may be required to completely replenish muscle glycogen (121,
164).
Similar Response in Y ounger and Older
Resistance-Trained Male Muscle Oxidative
207
Capacity Following Endurance Training
Hendrickse and colleagues (77) tested the hypothesis that superimposing
endur ance training in both older and younger highly resistance-tr ained men would
lead to an increase in fiber oxidativ e capaci ty and a decrease in fiber size. Eight
highly resistance-tr ained younger (mean age = 28 years) and seven older (mean
age = 67 years) men participated in a 10-week cycle endur ance-tr aining program
consisting of five 6-minute interv als at 75% max heart rate (HRmax) separ ated by
4-minute interv als at 90% HRmax, superimposed on their usual resistance training
program of at least 4 sessions per week (2 upper body, 2 lower body). Before and
after the 10 weeks of training,  V̇O2max, body fat percentage, an MRI of the upper
leg, the maximal voluntary isometri c contraction torque (MVC) of the knee
extensor muscles, and a vastus lateralis muscle biopsy were taken. While there
were expected differences in anatomic al cross-sectional area of the thigh muscles,
following training no relative difference was observ ed between younger and older
men for V̇O2max per kilogram body mass. The imposed endur ance training equal ly
increased the succinate dehydrogenas e (a Krebs cycle enzyme) activity in both
younger and older participants and significantly increased the number of capillaries
around type I fibers . These findings suggest that incorpor ating endur ance training
into a resistance training program can promote aerobic metabol ic adaptations
without compromising muscle size and strength in both younger and older
resistance-tr ained people. Extending this resear ch in the future will help to
determine whether  there is a threshold for the volume and type of endur ance
exercise beyond which leads to compr omised muscle size and strength
adaptations.
208
Bioenerg etic Limiting Factors in
Exercise Performance
Factors limiting maximal performance (22, 49, 79, 88, 104, 156)
must be consider ed in the mechanisms of fatigue experienced during
exercise and training. Understanding the possible limiting factors
associated with a particular athletic event is required when one is
designing training programs to achiev e a physiological adaptation
that seeks to delay fatigue and possibly enhance performance. Table
3.4 depicts examples of various  limiting factors based on depletion
of energy sources and increases in muscle hydrogen ions, although
other potential f actors ha ve been postulated.
Glycogen deple tion can be a limiting factor both for long-dur ation,
low-intensi ty exercise supported primari ly by aerobic metabolism and
for repeated, high-intensi ty exercise supported primari ly by
anaer obic mechanisms. Of importance to resistance training,
sprinting, and other primari ly anaer obic activities is the effect of
metabol ic acidosis on limiting contractile force (53, 79, 116, 117,
125). Several other factors have been implicated in the development
of muscle fatigue and may limit exercise performance, including
increased intracellular Pi, ammonia accumulation, increased ADP, and
impair ed calcium release from the sarcoplasmic reticulum (4, 5, 131,
156, 160). Further resear ch is needed to delineate the causes of
muscular f atigue and the l imiting factors in ex ercise perf ormance.
TABLE 3.4  Ranking of Bioenergetic Limiting Factors
ExerciseATP
and CPMuscle
glycogenLiver
glycogenFat
storesLower
pH
Marathon 1 5 4-5 2-3 1
Triathlon 1-2 5 4-5 1-2 1-2
5,000 m run 1-2 3 3 1-2 1
Note:  1 = least pr obable l imiting factor; 5 = most pr obable l imiting factor.
209
ExerciseATP
and CPMuscle
glycogenLiver
glycogenFat
storesLower
pH
1,500 m run 2-3 3-4 2 1-2 2-3
400 m swim 2-3 3-4 3 1 1-2
400 m run 3 3 1 1 4-5
100 m run 5 1-2 1 1 1-2
Discus 2-3 1 1 1 1
Repeated snatch ex ercise at
60% 1RM (10 sets)4-5 4-5 1-2 1-2 4-5
Note:  1 = least pr obable l imiting factor; 5 = most pr obable l imiting factor.
210
Oxygen Up take and the Aerobic and
Anaerobic Contributions to Exercise
Oxygen uptak e (or consumption) is a measur e of a person’ s ability to
take in oxygen via the respiratory system and deliver it to the
working tissue s via the cardiovascular system, and the ability of
working tissues (predominantly skeletal muscle) to use oxygen.
During low-intensi ty exercise with a constant power output, oxygen
uptak e increases for the first few minutes until a steady state of
uptak e (oxygen demand equals oxygen consumption) is reached
(figure 3.9) (7, 85).
FIGURE 3.9 Low -intensi ty, steady -state exercise metabol ism: 75% of maximal oxygen
uptak e (V̇O2max). EPOC = ex cess postex ercise o xygen consumption;  V̇O2 = oxygen uptak e.
At the start of an exercise bout, howev er, some of the energy
must be supplied through anaer obic mechanisms because the
aerobic system responds slowly to the initial increase in the demand
for energy (62, 155). This anaerobic contribution to the total energy
cost of exercise is termed the oxygen deficit  (figure 3.9) (85, 109).
After exercise ceases, oxygen uptak e remains above pre-exercise
211
levels for a period of time that varies according to the intensity and
length of the exercise. Postexercise oxygen uptak e has been termed
the oxygen debt (85, 109), recovery O2 (109), or the excess
postexercise oxygen consumption (EPOC)  (22). The EPOC is
the oxygen uptake above resting values used to restore homeostasis
to the pre-exercise condi tion (141). Only small to moder ate
relationships between the oxygen deficit and the EPOC have been
observ ed (13, 77); the oxygen deficit may influence the size of the
EPOC, but the two are not equal. The possible factors affecting the
EPOC are listed in the sidebar Excess Postexercise Oxygen
Consumption Is Intensi ty, Duration, and Mode Dependent  (17, 21,
22, 58, 109).
Excess Postexercise Oxygen Consumption
Is Intensity, Duration, and Mode
Dependent
Excess postex ercise oxygen consumption (EPOC) refers to the prolonged increase
in V̇O2 that ma y be observ ed for hours after ex ercise (58).
Aerobic Exercise and EPOC (17)
Intensi ty has the gr eatest ef fect on EPOC.
The greatest EPOC values are found when both exercise intensi ty (i.e.,
>50%-60%  V̇O2max) and dur ations (i.e. , >40 min) ar e high.
Performing brief, intermi ttent bouts of supramaximal exercise (i.e., >100%
V̇O2max) ma y induce the gr eatest EPOC wi th lower total work.
There is interindividual variabi lity for EPOC in response to a given relative
exercise stimulus.
The ef fects of aer obic ex ercise modes on EPOC ar e unclear .
Resistance Exercise and EPOC (17)
Heavy resistance exercise (i.e., three sets, eight exercises to exhaustion,
80%-90% 1RM) produces greater EPOC than circuit weight training (i.e., 4
sets, 8 ex ercises, 15 r epetitions, 50% 1RM).
Thus, EPOC is also intensi ty dependent in r esponse to r esistance tr aining.
212
Factors Responsible for EPOC (17)
Replenishment of o xygen in blood and muscle
ATP and CP r esynthesis
Increased body temper ature, circulation, and v entilation
Increased r ate of trigly ceride–f atty acid cy cling
Increased pr otein turno ver
Changes in ener gy efficiency during r ecovery
Anaer obic mechanisms provide much of the energy for work if the
exercise intensi ty is above the maximal oxygen uptak e that a person
can attain (figure 3.10). Gener ally, as the contribut ion of anaer obic
mechanisms supporting the exercise increases, the exercise duration
decreases (7 , 68, 158, 159).
FIGURE 3.10 High-intensi ty, non–steady -state exercise metabol ism (80% of maximum
power output). The required V̇O2 here is the oxygen uptak e that would be required to
sustain the exercise if such an uptak e were possible to attain. Because it is not, the oxygen
deficit lasts for the duration of the exercise. EPOC = excess postex ercise oxygen
consumption; V̇O2max = maximal o xygen uptak e.
The approximate contribu tion of anaer obic and aerobic
mechanisms to maximal sustained efforts on a cycle ergometer is
213
shown in table 3.5 (112, 151, 161). Anaer obic mechanisms are
primary contrib utors for exercise durations up to 60 seconds, after
which aerobic metabol ism becomes progressively the primary
energy-supplying mechanism. The contribution of anaer obic
mechanisms to this type of exercise represents the maximal
anaer obic capaci ty (111, 151).
TABLE 3.5  Contributions of Anaerobic and Aerobic
Mechanisms to Maximal Sustained Efforts in Bicycle
Ergometry
0-5
s30
s60
s90
s 150 s 200 s
Exercise intensi ty (% of maximum
power output)100 55 35 31 Not
availableNot
available
Contribution of anaer obic mechanisms
(%)96 75 50 35 30 22
Contribution of aer obic mechanisms
(%)4 25 50 65 70 78
214
Metabolic Specificity of Training
Appropriate exercise intensi ties and rest interv als can permi t the
“selection” of specific primary energy systems during training for
specific athlet ic events (22, 109, 157). Few sports or physical
activities require maximal sustained effort to exhaustion or near-
exhaustion, such as competi tive middle-distance sprints (400 m to
1,600 m). Most team sports and training activities produce metabol ic
profiles that are very similar to those of a series of high-intensi ty,
constant - or near-constant -effort exercise bouts intersp ersed with
rest periods, such as American footbal l, basketball, and hockey. In
this type of exercise, the required exercise intensi ty (work
performed) that must be met during each exercise bout is much
greater than that which can be sustained using aerobic energy
sources alone. Increasing aerobic energy efficiency and capaci ty
through primari ly long, slow aerobic endur ance training while
simultaneously compr omising or neglecting anaer obic energy
efficiency and anaer obic capaci ty training is of little benefi t to
athletes in these sports (84, 111). For example, it would be of little
benefi t for a basebal l player to run many long, slow miles during
training rather than focusing on exercises that can concurr ently
improve anaer obic power and capaci ty using time efficient interv al
training.
The use of appropriate exercise intensities and rest
intervals (i.e., work-to-rest ratios) allows for the
“selection” of specific primary energy systems during
training and, because this is more reflective of the
actual metabolic demands of the sport, results in more
efficient and productive regimens for specific athletic
events with various metabolic demands.
215
Interval Training
Interval training  is a method that emph asizes bioener getic
adaptations for a more efficient energy transfer within the metabol ic
pathways by using predetermined interv als of exercise and rest
periods (i.e., work-to-rest ratios ). Theoretically, properly spaced
work-to-rest interv als allow more work to be completed at higher
exercise intensi ties with the same or less fatigue than during
continuous training at the same relative intensi ty. An early paper by
Christensen and colleagues (31) compar ed the total running
distance, average oxygen uptak e, and blood lactate concentration
during continuous running for 5 minutes and interv al running
totaling 30 minutes with 2:1, 1:1, and 1:2 work-to-rest ratios.
Subjects were assigned a continuous running intensi ty (speed) that
would result in fatigue within 5 minutes. At that fast pace during the
continuous run, the subjects were able to complete 0.81 miles (1.3
km) before exhaustion. Howe ver, by using 2:1, 1:1, and 1:2 work-to-
rest ratios and the same running intensi ty for a total duration of 30
minutes, the subjects were able to complete 4.14 miles (6.66 km),
3.11 miles (5 km), and 2.07 miles (3.33 km), respectiv ely, all while
working aerobic capaci ty in a manner similar to that in the
continuous running condi tion. Therefore, much more distance can be
accompl ished at higher intensi ties with interv al training; this concept
has been establ ished f or over 45 y ears (31).
A series of short-term (two- week) interv al training studies used
six sessions of four to seven 30-second maximum cycling efforts
interspaced with 4 minutes of recovery (1:8 work-to-rest ratio).
These studies demonstr ated improvements in muscle oxidativ e
potential (26, 63), muscle buffering capaci ty (26, 63), muscle
glycogen content (25, 26), and time-trial performance (25), as well
as a doubled aerobic endur ance capaci ty (26). In addition, a similar
four-week interv al training program exhibi ted increases in muscle
activation and total work output (38) in trained cyclists. This
highlights the concept that the modal ity of exercise does not seem
216
to influence the efficacy of using interv al training for metabol ic
adaptations.
Few studies provide results that can be used to gener ate
defini tive guidel ines for choosing specific work-to-rest ratios. One
such study, howev er, reported aerobic and anaer obic metabol ic
variables, total work, and time-to-exhaustion differences between
two different work-to-rest ratios in elite cyclists (119). The cyclists
performed two intermi ttent protocols that included either a 40:20-
second or a 30:30-second work-to-rest interv al to exhau stion at a
fixed work rate. The 40:20-second work-to-rest ratio resulted in
significantly reduced total work and time to exhaustion while
producing higher metabol ic values (V̇O2max, lactate concentr ation,
ETC). In contrast, the 30:30-second work-to-rest ratio provided
sustained but slightly lower metabol ic values for a consider ably
longer period of time. Another study manipulated the work variable
via intensi ty and duration of the work-to-rest ratios. Wakefield and
Glaister (154)  reported a greater amount of time above 95%
V̇O2max during running at an intensity of 105% of V̇O2max versus
115% of V̇O2max with a work duration of 30 seconds rather than 20
and 25 second s (rest = 20 s). When one is determining the proper
work-to-rest ratio for athletes, knowledge of the time interv als,
intensi ty of work, and recovery periods for each of the energy
systems is critical to maximizing the amount of work that can be
accompl ished for a given exercise intensi ty. For examp le, after a
bout of maximal exercise that depletes CP stores, the complete
resynthesis of CP is gener ally 3 to 5 minutes but may take up to 8
minutes (75) even though the half time for CP resynthe sis is only
approximately 30 seconds, suggesting that short-duration, high-
intensi ty exercise requires greater work-to-rest ratios due to the
aerobic mechanisms that r eplete phosphagen stor es (75).
In contrast, as the goals of training change to longer -duration,
lower -intensi ty tasks, the durations of the work interv als can be
longer; this will lengthen the rest periods and decrease the work-to-
rest ratios. Table 3.6 provides some gener al guidel ines for work-to-
217
rest ratios that are designed to emphasiz e the development of
specific energy systems based on the theoretical time course for
metabol ic system involvement and substr ate recovery. Howev er, it
should be noted that more resear ch is necessary to provide
evidence-based r ecommendations f or optimal work -to-rest ratios.
TABLE 3.6  Using Interval Training to Train Specific
Energy Systems
% of maximum
powerPrimary system
stressedTypical
exercise timeRange of work-to-rest
period ratios
90-100 Phosphagen 5-10 s 1:12 to 1:20
75-90 Fast gly colysis 15-30 s 1:3 to 1:5
30-75 Fast gly colysis and
oxidativ e1-3 min 1:3 to 1:4
20-30 Oxidativ e >3 min 1:1 to 1:3
High-Intensity Interval Training
High-intensity interval training (HIIT)  involves brief repeated
bouts of high-intensi ty exercise with intermi ttent recovery periods.
High-intensi ty interv al training typical ly incorpor ates either running-
or cycling-based modes of exercise and is an efficient exercise
regimen for eliciting cardiopulmonary (23) and metabol ic and
neuromuscular (24) adaptations. In fact, Buchhei t and Laursen (23)
stated that HIIT “is today considered one of the most effective forms
of exercise for improving physical performance in athletes” (p. 314).
High-intensi ty interv al training is often discussed in terms of duty
cycles  involving a high-intensi ty work phase followed by a lower -
intensi ty recovery phase. However, the duty cycle is analogous to a
work bout or period as commonly used in other training regimes. It
has been suggested that nine different HIIT variables can be
manipulated to achiev e the most precise metabol ic specificity (23),
including
intensi ty of the activ e portion of each work bout,
218
duration of the activ e portion of each work bout,
intensi ty of the r ecovery portion of each work bout,
duration of the r ecovery portion of each work bout,
number of work bouts perf ormed in each set,
number of sets,
rest time between sets,
recovery intensi ty between sets, and
mode of ex ercise for HIIT .
The authors (24) indicate, howev er, that the intensi ties and
durations of the active and recovery portions of each work bout are
the most important factors to consider . To optimiz e HIIT training
adaptations for athletes, HIIT sessions should maximiz e the time
spent at or near V̇O2max. In comparison to more gener al interv al
training, during HIIT specifically, the cumulativ e duration and
intensi ty of the active portio ns of the work bouts should equate to
several minutes abo ve 90% of V̇O2max (24).
The benefi ts of a HIIT protocol designed to repeatedly  elicit a
very high percentage of V̇O2max are primari ly the result of the
concurr ent recruitment of large motor units and near-maximal
cardiac output (6). Thus, HIIT provides a stimulus for both oxidativ e
muscle fiber adaptation and myocardial hypertr ophy. Additional HIIT
adaptations include increases  in V̇O2max, proton buffering, glycogen
content, anaer obic thresholds, time to exhaustion, and time-trial
performance. For example, Gibala and cowork ers (63) reported
equiv alent improvements in muscle buffering capaci ty and glycogen
content for HIIT at 250% of V̇O2peak during four to six 30-se cond
cycling sprints compar ed to continuous cycling for 90 to 120 minutes
at 65% of V̇O2peak over six total training sessions. In addition, 750
kilojoules cycling time trials decreased in both groups by 10.1% and
7.5% in the HIIT and long, slow endur ance training groups,
respectiv ely. Thus, HIIT provided performance and physiological
adaptations equivalent to those of long, slow endur ance training but
in a time-ef ficient manner .
219
Combining Training Modalities
Some suggest that aerobic endur ance training should be added to
the training of anaer obic athletes to enhance recovery, because it is
postulated that recovery relies primari ly on aerobic mechanisms. In
contrast, it is postulated that anaer obic resistance training should be
added to aerobic endur ance training because it can aid in preventing
soft tissue injuries. Howev er, when considering the metabol ic
specificity of training, thoug ht should be given to whether the
practitioner is programming combination training, cross-tr aining, or
concurr ent training. These are related but distinctly  different
concepts when seeking to achiev e metabol ic specific training
adaptations. Broadly, combination training  refers to any training
program that includes a mix of different types of exercises or
activities. It does not necessa rily imply a specific structur e or timing,
just that various exercise modal ities are combined to achiev e overall
fitness improvements. For example, an 800-meter runner may
include sessions of long, slow distance aerobic work alongside more
event-speci fic distances and efforts. In contrast, cross-training
deliberately involves incorpo rating different types of exercise with
the same underlying metabol ic adaptation profile (i.e., enhancing
aerobic capaci ty), without overstressing the primary activity muscles
(e.g., including rowing in a program for a runner), often with the aim
of complemen ting the main sport performance. In comparison,
concurrent training  refers to the simultaneous training of both
anaer obic resistance training and aerobic endur ance training at
multiple times within the same period, often within the same training
session or day. In fact, several studies have demonstr ated that
recovery in anaer obic power  output is related to endur ance fitness
(14, 15, 74). Bogdanis and colleagues (14) reported positive
relationships in power recovery in the first 10 seconds of a cycling
sprint, the resynthesis of PCr, and endur ance fitness (V̇O2max).
Howev er, aerobic endur ance training may reduce anaer obic
performance capabi lities, particularly for high-str ength, high-power
performance (82). This reduction in high-str ength, high-power
220
performance capabi lities could be due to an interference in
anaer obic energy production  capabi lities due to aerobic endur ance
training (153). Additional ly, combined anaer obic and aerobic
endur ance training can reduce gains in muscle girth (36, 128),
maximum strength (36, 76, 128), and speed- and power -related
performance (44 , 73).
Even though the exact mechanism for this interference
phenomenon is unknown and whether there is any threshold limit, it
has been suggested that combination training and, more specifically,
concurr ent training may increase training volume to a level that may
result in overtraining in comparison to aerobic and anaer obic training
alone. Hickson and colleagues (82) provide evidence that concurr ent
training that includes progressive endur ance running and cycling and
heavy resistance training may produce a plateau effect and,
ultimately , a decrease in strength gains. Specifically, it was reported
that the concurr ent training program of heavy resistance training
combined with an endur ance program provided significant
improvements in squat strength during the first seven weeks of the
program, followed by a two-week plateau and then a decrease in
squat strength  during the final two weeks of the program. The
results provided evidence that continual strength gains may be
inhibi ted with progressive concurr ent endur ance training such as
running and cycling. Other mechanisms that have been suggested to
hinder the development of strength when combined with endur ance
training are (a) decreasing rapid voluntary activation, (b) chronical ly
lower muscle glycogen levels that limit intracellular signal ing
responses during resistance training, and (c) fiber type transition to
slow-twitch fibers (114).
Alternativ ely, some studies and reviews indicate that the opposi te
holds true; these suggest that anaer obic training (resistance
training) can improve low- and high-intensi ty exercise endur ance
(54, 83, 84, 136). Sedano and colleagues (134) reported
improvements in performance of highly trained runners as a result of
concurr ent endurance, resistance, and plyometric training. There
221
was no reduction in V̇O2max over the 12 weeks in runners who
participated in resistance and plyometric training. Furthermor e, the
concurr ent training improved performance measur es such as
maximal strength, peak running velocity, and 3-kilometer (1.7 miles)
time trial compar ed to endur ance training alone. Thus, in highly
trained runners it appears that strength training can improve
performance whi le not hindering metabol ic par ameters ( V̇O2max).
Although oxidativ e metabol ism is important for increased
postex ercise V̇O2, lactate removal, and PCr restoration from heavy
anaer obic exercise (e.g., resistance training and sprint training)
(135), care must be used in prescribing aerobic endur ance training
for anaer obic sports. In this context, it should be noted that specific
anaer obic training can stimulate increases in aerobic power and
enhance markers of recovery (54). Thus, it appears that extensiv e
aerobic endur ance training to enhance recovery from anaer obic
events is not necessary and may be counterpr oductiv e in most
strength and power sports.
222
Conclusion
Training programs with increased productivi ty can be designed
through an understanding of how energy is produced during various
types of exercise and how energy production can be modified by
specific training regimens. Which energy system is used to supply
energy for muscular contraction and to perform work is determined
primari ly by the intensi ty of exercise and secondari ly by the duration
of exercise. Metabol ic responses and training adaptations are largely
regulated by exercise characteristics (e.g., intensi ty, duration, and
recovery interv als). How these responses and adaptat ions occur
following physical activity forms the basis for metabol ic specificity of
exercise and training. This principle allows for enhanced athletic
performance through the implementation of improved training
programs.
KEY TERMS
adenosine diphosphate (ADP)
adenosine monophosphate (AMP)
adenosine triphosphatase (A TPase)
adenosine triphosphate (A TP)
adenylate kinase r eaction
aerobic
aerobic gly colysis
allosteric activ ation
allosteric inhibi tion
anabol ism
anaer obic
anaer obic gly colysis
beta o xidation
bioener getics
branched-chain amino acid
calcium A TPase
223
catabol ism
combination tr aining
concurr ent tr aining
Cori cy cle
creatine kinase
creatine phosphate (CP)
cross-tr aining
cytochr ome
depletion
duty cycles
electr on transport chain (ET C)
ender gonic r eaction
energy
energy substr ate
excess postex ercise o xygen consumption (EPOC)
exergonic r eaction
fast gly colysis
flavin adenine dinucleotide (F ADH 2)
gluconeogenesis
glycogenolysis
glycolysis
glycolytic system
high-intensi ty interv al training (HIIT )
hydrolysis
inorganic phosphate
interv al training
Krebs cy cle
lactate
lactate thr eshold (L T)
lactic acid
law of mass action
LT1
LT2
mass action ef fect
224
metabol ic acidosis
metabol ic speci ficity
metabol ism
mitochondria
myokinase r eaction
myosin A TPase
near-equilibrium r eactions
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH)
onset of blood lactate ac cumulation (OBL A)
oxidativ e phosphorylation
oxidativ e system
oxygen debt
oxygen defici t
oxygen uptak e
phosphagen system
phosphocr eatine (PCr)
phosphof ructokinase (PFK)
phosphorylation
pyruvate
rate-limiting step
repletion
slow gly colysis
sodium-potassium A TPase
substr ate-lev el phosphorylation
wet muscle
work-to-rest ratio
STUDY QUESTIONS
  1.  Which of the following best describes the role of lactate during
the dev elopment of peripher al muscle f atigue?
  a.  Lactate ac cumulation and lactic acidosis ar e the primary
cause of peripher al fatigue.
  b.  High tissue lactate concentr ations often corr elate wi th
muscular f atigue, so they ar e thought to be the primary
225
cause of the changes in pH wi th high-intensi ty fatiguing
exercise.
  c.  Lactate is a b y-product of when p yruvate is catalyz ed, and
although metabol ic acidosis has a pr ominent r ole in
peripher al fatigue, other f actors such as an incr eased
intersti tial K+ concentr ation and P i that impairs Ca++
release ha ve been r eported to pla y a role in the
development of peripher al fatigue.
  d.  The ex cess H+ that causes peripher al fatigue primari ly
results from the r apid h ydrolysis of A TP during the
conversion of p yruvate to lactate.
  2.  What is the correct net reaction summary for glycolysis when
pyruvate is con verted to lactate?
  a.  Glucose + 2P i + 2ADP → 2Lactate + 2A TP + 2H 2O + H+
  b.  Glucose + 2P i + 2ADP → 2Lactate + 2A TP + 2H 2O
  c.  Glucose + ADP + cr eatine phosphate → A TP + cr eatine
  d.  Glucose + 2ADP → Lactate + 2A TP
  3.  Metabol ism is the total of which f our reactions?
  a.  aer obic, anaer obic, o xidativ e, and gly colytic
  b.  catabol ic, anabol ic, exergonic, and ender gonic
  c.  anabol ic, catabol ic, gly colytic, and o xidativ e
  d.  h ydrolysis, catabol ic, anabol ic, and ender gonic
  4.  Which enzyme is the most important regulator of glycolysis
and wh y?
  a.  phosphof ructokinase, because i t is the r ate-limiting step
  b.  hex okinase, because i t is the r ate-limiting step
  c.  phosphof ructokinase, because i t is al losteric activ ating
  d.  p yruvate kinase, because i t is the r ate-limiting step
5. During exercise what are the primary and secondary
determinants for which energy system is the primary
contributing system?
a. primary: intensi ty; secondary: t ype
b. primary: intensi ty; secondary: dur ation
226