# Section 3.2

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 3: Bioenergetics of Exercise and Training

**Section:** 3.2 -- Biological Energy Systems

**PDF Pages:** 184--200

compar ed to CP. As with the phosphagen system, glycolysis occurs in
the sar coplasm.
As depicted in figure 3.2, pyruvate , the end result of glycolysis,
may proceed in one of two dir ections:
1. Pyruv ate can be con verted to lactate  in the sar coplasm.
2. Pyruv ate can be shut tled into the mi tochondria.
When pyruvate is converted to lactate, ATP resynthesis occurs at
a faster rate via the rapid regener ation of NAD+ but is limited in
duration due to subsequent H+ production resulting in decreased
cytosol ic pH. Howev er, the excess H+ does not primarily result from
the rapid hydrolysis of ATP during the conversion of pyruvate to
lactate; it is the breakdown of ATP to ADP and Pi, which releases H+
ions. The conversion process of pyruvate to lactate is often called
anaerobic glycolysis  (or fast glycolysis ). Howev er, when
pyruvate is shuttled into the mitochondria to under go the Krebs
cycle, the ATP resynthesis rate is slower because of the numer ous
reactions but can occur for a longer duration if the exercise intensi ty
is low enoug h. This process is often referred to as aerobic
glycolysis  (or slow glycoly sis). At higher exercise intens ities,
pyruvate and NADH will increase above what can be handled by
pyruvate dehydrogenase and will then be converted into lactate and
NAD+. Unfortunately , because glycolysis itself does not depend on
oxygen, the terms anaer obic and aerobic (or fast and slow,
respectiv ely) glycolysis  are probably not practical for describing the
processes. Nevertheless, the fate of pyruvate is ultimately controlled
by the energy demands within the cell. If energy demand is high and
must be transferred quickly , as in resistance training, pyruvate is
primari ly converted to lactate in support of anaer obic glycolysis. If
energy deman d is not as high and oxygen is present in sufficient
quanti ties in the cell, pyruvate can be further oxidized in the
mitochondria.
184
FIGURE 3.2 Gly colysis. ADP = adenosine diphos phate; ATP = adenosine triphosphate;
NAD+, NADH = nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide.
Glycolysis and the Formation of Lactate
The formation of lactate from pyruvate is catalyz ed by the enzyme
lactate dehydrogenase. Sometimes, mistak enly, the end result of this
reaction is said to be the formation of lactic acid. However, due to
the physiological pH (i.e., near 7) and earlier steps in glycolysis that
185
consume protons (125), lactate—r ather than lactic acid—is the
product of the lactate dehydrogenase reaction. Although the
muscular fatigue experienced  during exercise often correlates with
high tissue concentr ations of lactate, lactate is not the cause of
fatigue (22, 27, 125). Proton (H+) accumulation during fatigue
reduces the intracellular pH, inhibi ts glycolytic reactions, and directly
interferes with muscle’ s excitation–contr action coupl ing—possibly by
inhibi ting calcium binding to troponin (57, 115) or by interfering with
crossbridge recycling (51, 57, 79, 115, 146). Also, the decrease in
pH inhibi ts the enzymatic turno ver rate of the cell’s energy systems
(9, 78). Overall, this process  of an exercise-induced decrease in pH
is referred to as metabolic acidosis  (125), and may be responsible
for much of the peripher al fatigue that occurs during exercise (42,
156). Also, the role of metabol ic acidosis in peripher al fatigue has
been questioned (130), and other factors have been reported to play
a prominent role in peripher al fatigue, such as an increased
intersti tial K+ concentr ation and Pi that impairs Ca++ release (120,
139). Howev er, evidence suggests that other mechanisms, such as
the simple hydrolysis of ATP (125) (equation 3.1), are responsible for
most of the H+ accumulation and that lactate itself actual ly works to
decrease metabolic acidosis rather than accelerate it (27, 125). See
the sidebar Lactic Acid Does Not Cause Metabol ic Acidosis . In fact,
lactate is often used as an energy subst rate, especial ly in type I
and cardiac muscle fibers (10, 108, 162). It is also used in
gluconeogenesis  (i.e., the Cori cycle )—the formatio n of glucose
from noncarboh ydrate sources, lactate in this case—during  extended
exercise and r ecovery (19, 108).
Normal ly, blood and muscle have a low concentr ation of lactate.
The reported normal range of lactate concentr ation in blood is 0.5 to
2.2 mmol/L at rest (67) and 0.5 to 2.2 mmol for each kilogram of
wet muscle  (muscle that has not been desiccated) (67). Lactate
production increases with exercise intensi ty (67, 129) and appears to
depend on muscle fiber type. Resear chers have reported that the
maximal rate of lactate production for type II muscle fibers is 0.5
186
mmol · g−1 · s−1 (46, 107) and for type I muscle is 0.25 mmol · g−1 ·
s−1 (113). The higher rate of lactate production by type II muscle
fibers may reflect a higher concentr ation or activity of glycolytic
enzymes than in type I muscle fibers (10, 122). Although the highest
possible concentr ation of lactate accumulation is not known, severe
fatigue may occur at blood  concentr ations between 20 and 25
mmol/L (107); one study, howev er, showed blood lactate
concentr ations greater than 30 mmol/L following multiple bouts of
dynamic exercise (79). Along with exercise intensi ty and muscle fiber
type, exercise duration (67), state of training (66), and initial
glycogen lev els (67) can also influence lactate ac cumulation.
Blood lactate concentr ations reflect the net balance of lactate
production versus clearance as a result of bicarbonate (HCO 3−)
buffering. HCO 3− minimiz es the disrupting influence of the H+ on pH
by accepting a proton (H+) and becoming carbonic acid (H2CO3).
Carbonic acid then dissociate s to H2O and CO2 in the lungs, where
the CO2 is exhaled. The clearance and buffering of lactate from the
blood reflects a return to homeostatic resting level. Lactate can be
cleared by oxidation within the muscle fiber in which it was
produced, or it can be transported in the blood to other muscle
fibers to be oxidized (108). Lactate can also be transpo rted in the
blood to the liver, where it is converted to glucose. This process is
referred to as the Cori cycle  and is depicted in figure 3.3.
Gollnick and colleagues (67) and others (8, 72, 118) have
reported that blood lactate concentr ations normal ly return to pre-
exercise values within an hour after activity, depending on the
duration and intensi ty of exercise, training status, and type of
recovery (i.e., passiv e versus active). Light activity during the
postex ercise period has been shown to increase lactate clearance
rates (55, 67, 72, 80, 118). For example, an active recovery
following a 200-yard (182.9 m) maximal-ef fort swim resulted in the
greatest lactat e clearance in comparison to a passiv e recovery in
competi tive swimmers (72). In addition, both aerobical ly trained (67)
and anaer obical ly trained (62) athletes have faster lactate clearance
187
rates than untrained people. Peak blood lactate concentr ations occur
approximately 5 minutes after the cessation of exercise (67), a delay
frequently attributed to the time required to buffer and transport
lactate from the tissue to the blood (95). Hence, lactate clearance
should be recogniz ed positively as an indirect marker for recovery
from metabol ic acidosis as the system returns to metabol ic
homeostasis and not as w aste pr oduct of metabol ism.
FIGURE 3.3  The Cori cy cle.
Blood lactate accumulation is greater following high-i ntensi ty,
intermi ttent exercise (e.g., resistance training and sprints) than
following lower -intensi ty, continuous exercise (79, 103, 152).
Howev er, trained people experience lower blood lactate
concentr ations than untrained people when exercising at an absolute
workload (same resistance) (66, 90, 143). This indicates that
resistance training results in alterations in lactate response similar to
those from aerobic endur ance training (67, 91, 143). These
alterations include a lower blood lactate concentr ation at a given
workload in trained individuals and higher blood lactate
concentr ations in trained individuals during maximal exercise (67, 90,
143).
188
The net reaction for glycolysis when pyruvate is converted to
lactate ma y be summariz ed as f ollows:
Glucose + 2P i + 2ADP → 2Lactate + 2ATP + H 2O   (3.4)
Lactic Acid Does Not Cause Metabolic
Acidosis
Lactic acidosis is a common misnomer , because lactic acid is inaccurately believed
to cause the burning sensations experienced with muscle fatigue during high-
intensi ty exercise. This is based on the assumption that there is an imme diate
dissociation of lactic acid into lactate and H+ when produced by glycolysis in
skeletal muscle (1, 60, 125). Howev er, the phosphogly cerate kinase reaction of
glycolysis involves the transfer of a phosphate leaving a carbo xylate (COO−) group
(105). Thus, as shown in figure 3.4, no proton (H+) exists to dissociate from
lactate (60, 125).
Figure 3.4  The phosphoglycerate kinase reaction of glycolysis, illustrating
that there is no proton (H+) to dissociate from lactate.
Furthermor e, the lactate dehydrogenase reaction itself consumes protons, which
alkalizes the cell (60, 125)—qui te the opposi te of acidosis. In fact, Busa and
Nuccitelli (27) stated, “ATP hydrolysis, not lactate accumulation, is the dominant
source of the intracellular acid load …” (p. 430). The take-home message from
Robergs and colleagues (125) is that the hydrolysis of ATP outside  the
mitochondria is primari ly responsible for the proton (H+) accumu lation during
exercise-induced metabolic acidosis—not the conversion of pyruvate to lactate as is
commonly believed. Consequently , the term lactic acidosis  is indeed a misnom er,
and the term metabol ic acidosis  is recommended to describe the reduced pH
within sk eletal muscle during high-intensi ty, fatiguing ex ercise.
189
Glycolysis Leading to the Krebs Cycle
If oxygen is present in sufficient quanti ties in the mitochondria
(special ized cellular organel les where the reactions of aerobic
metabol ism occur), the end product of glycolysis, pyruvate, is not
converted to lactate but is transported into the mitochondria. Also
transported are two molecul es of reduced nicotinamide adenine
dinucleotide (NADH)  produced during glycolytic reactions
(reduced  refers to the added hydrogen). When pyruvate enters the
mitochondria, it is converted to acetyl-CoA (CoA stands for
coenzyme A) by the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex, resulting in
the loss of a carbon as CO2. Acetyl-CoA can then enter the Krebs
cycle for further ATP resynthesis. The NADH molecules drop off H+ at
the electron transport chain, where they can also be used to
resynthesiz e ATP.
The net reaction for glycolysis when pyruvate is shuttled to the
mitochondria ma y be summariz ed as f ollows:
Glucose + 2P i + 2ADP + 2NAD+ → 2Pyruvate + 2ATP + 2NADH + 2H 2O    
(3.5)
Energy Yield of Glycolysis
There are two primary mechanisms for resynthesizing ATP during
metabol ism:
1. Substr ate-lev el phosphorylation
2. Oxidativ e phosphorylation
Phosphorylation  is the process of adding a Pi to another
molecule. For example, ADP + Pi → ATP is the phosphorylati on of
ADP to ATP. Oxidative phosphorylation  refers to the resynthesis
of ATP in the electron transport chain (ETC) . In contrast,
substrate-level phosphory lation  refers to the direct resynthesis
of ATP from ADP during a single reaction in the metabol ic pathways.
To illustrate, in glycolysis two reactions result in substr ate-lev el
phosphorylation of ADP to A TP (42):
190
         1,3-bisphosphogly cerate + ADP + P  i→Phosphogly cerate kinase   3-
phosphogly cerate + A TP  (3.6)
Phosphoenolp yruvate + ADP++ Pi→Pyruv ate kinasePyruv ate + ATP  (3. 7)
The gross number of ATP molecules that are resynthesiz ed as a
result of substr ate-lev el phosphorylation during glycolysis is four
(figure 3.2, page 57). Howe ver, the reaction that converts fructose-
6-phosphate to fructose-1,6- bisphosphate (catalyz ed by the enzyme
phosphofructokinase [PFK] ) in glycolysis requires the hydrolysis
of one ATP molecule. In addition, there are two possible sources of
glucose: blood glucose and muscle glycogen. When blood glucose
enters the muscle cell, it must be phosphorylated to remain in the
cell and to maintain the glucose concentr ation gradient  (67). The
phosphorylation of one molec ule of blood glucose, which is catalyz ed
by hexokinase,  also requires the hydrolysis of one ATP. In contrast,
when muscle glycogen is broken down (i.e., glycogenolysis ) to
glucose with the help of the enzyme glycogen phosphorylase, the
glucose is already phosphorylated, and it does not require the
hydrolysis of ATP. The bottom line is that when glycolysis begins with
one molecule of blood glucos e, two ATP molecules are used and four
ATP are resynthesiz ed, which  results in a net resynthesis of two ATP
molecules. When glycolysis begins from muscle glycogen, only one
ATP is used and four ATP are resynthesiz ed, which yields a net
resynthesis of three ATP molecules. The net yield rate of ATP
resynthesis highlights the role and importance of maintaining muscle
glycogen stor es thr ough pr oper nutri tion.
Control of Glycolysis
In general, the rate of glycolysis is stimulated to increase during
intense muscl e actions by high concentr ations of ADP, Pi, and
ammonia and by a slight decrease in pH and AMP (22, 61, 142), all
of which are signs of increased ATP hydrolysis and a need for
energy. In contrast, glycolysis is inhibi ted by markedly lower pH,
ATP, CP, citrate, and increased free fatty acids (22), which are
usually present at rest. (Note that a slight decrease in pH increases
191
glycolysis, but if pH continues to decrease significantly it will inhibi t
the rate of glycolysis. ) Howev er, the regulation of glycolysis (109) is
more specifically influenced by the concentr ations and turno ver rates
of three crucial glycolytic enzymes: hexokinase, PFK, and pyruvate
kinase. All three are regulatory enzymes in glycolysis, because each
has important allosteric (meaning “other site”) binding sites.
Allosteric regulation occurs when the end product of a reaction or
series of reactions feeds back to regulate the turno ver rate of key
enzymes in the metabol ic pathways. Consequently , this process is
also called end product regulation  (87) or feedback regulation  (61).
Allosteric inhibition  occurs when an end product binds to the
regulatory enzyme and decreases its turno ver rate and slows
product format ion. In contrast, allosteric activation  occurs when
an “activ ator” binds wi th the enzyme and incr eases i ts turno ver rate.
Hexokinase, which catalyz es the phosphorylation of glucose to
glucose-6-phosphate, is allosterical ly inhibi ted by the concentration
of glucose-6-phosphate in the sarcoplasm (61). Thus, the higher the
concentr ation of glucose-6-phosphate, the more hexokinase will be
inhibi ted. In addition, the phosphorylation of glucose commi ts it to
the cell so that it cannot leave. Similarly, the PFK reaction (fructose-
6-phosphate → fructose 1,6-bisphosphate) commi ts the cell to
metabol izing glucose rather than storing it as glycogen.
Phosphof ructokinase is the most important regulator of glycolysis
even though it is the slowest reaction of the steps that makes up
glycolysis because it is the bottleneck, or the rate-limiting step.
ATP is an allosteric inhibi tor of PFK; therefore, as intracellular ATP
concentr ations rise, PFK activity decreases and reduces the
conversion of fructose-6-phosphate to fructose 1,6-bisphosphate
and, subsequently , decreases activity of the glycolytic pathway.
Howev er, AMP is an allosteric activator of PFK and a powerf ul
stimulator of glycolysis. Moreover, the ammonia produced during
high-intensi ty exercise as a result of AMP or amino acid deamination
(removing the amine group from the amino acid molecule) can also
stimulate PFK. Pyruv ate kinase catalyz es the conversion of
192
phosphoenolp yruvate to pyruvate and is the final regulatory enzyme.
Pyruv ate kinase is allosterical ly inhibi ted by ATP and acetyl-CoA (the
latter is a Krebs cycle intermediate) and activated by high
concentr ations of AMP and f ructose-1,6-bisphosphate (61).
Lactate Threshold and Onset of Blood Lactate
Accumulation
As exercise intensi ty increases, specific break points are evident in
the lactate accumulation curve (figure 3.5), indirectly representing
the change in metabol ic acidosis (39, 99). The exercise intensi ty or
relative intensi ty at which blood lactate begins an abrupt increase
above the baseline concentr ation has been termed the lactate
threshold (LT) or (LT1)  (163). The LT represents a significantly
increased reliance on the glycolytic pathway for energy production to
meet demand. The LT corresponds well with the ventilatory
threshold (breaking point in the relationship between ventilation and
V̇O2) and is often used as a mark er of the anaer obic thr eshold.
The LT typical ly begins at 50% to 60% of maximal oxygen
uptake  in untrained individuals and at 70% to 80% in aerobical ly
trained athletes (29, 52). A second exponential increase in the rate
of lactate accumulation has been noted at higher relative intensi ties
of exercise. This second point of inflection has been termed the
onset of blood lactate accumulation (OBLA)  or lactate
threshold (LT2) and occurs approximately when the concentr ation
of blood  lactate reaches 4 mmol/L (85, 138, 144). Alternativ ely, the
LT2 threshold can be calcula ted, with the Dmax modified method
reported to have the highest repeatabi lity (81). The breaks in the
lactate accumu lation curve may correspond to the points at which
intermediate and large motor units are recruited during increasing
exercise intensi ties (94). The muscle cells associated with large
motor units are typical ly type II fibers, which are particularly suited
for anaer obic metabol ism and lactate pr oduction.
193
FIGURE 3.5  Lactate thr eshold (L T) and onset of blood lactate ac cumulation (OBL A).
Reprinted by permission from T.O. Bompa and G.G. Haff, Periodization: Theory and Methodology of Training, 5th ed.
(Human Kinetics, 2009), 295.
Some studies suggest that training at intensi ties near or above
the LT or OBLA pushes the LT and OBLA to the right (i.e., lactate
accumulation occurs later at a higher exercise intensi ty) (39, 43).
This shift probably occurs as a result of changes in hormone release,
particularly reduced catecholamine release at high exercise
intensi ties, and increased mitochondrial content that allows for
greater production of ATP through aerobic mechanisms. Broadly, the
training-induced adaptations result in the athlete being able to rely
more on free fatty acids to meet the ATP demands of the exercise
task. Thus shifting the LT or OBLA to the right allows the athlete to
perform at higher percentages of maximal oxygen uptak e without as
194
much lactate accumulation (change in metabol ic acidosis) in the
blood (22, 41).
The Oxid ative (Aerobic) System
The oxidative system, the primary source of ATP at rest and during
low-intensi ty activities, uses primari ly carboh ydrate and fats as
substr ates (62). Protein does not provide a significant contribution to
total energy; however, the use of protein does significantly increase
during long-term starvation and long bouts (>90 min) of exercise
(41, 104). At rest, approximately 70% of the ATP produced is
derived from fats and 30% from carboh ydrate. Following the onset
of activity, as the intensi ty of the exercise increases, there is a shift
in substr ate preference from fats to carboh ydrate. During high-
intensi ty aerobic exercise, almost 100% of energy is derived from
carboh ydrate if an adequate  supply is available, with only minimal
contributions from fats and protein. Howev er, during prolonged,
submaximal, steady -state work, there is a gradual shift from
carboh ydrate back to fats (due to glycogen depletion), and to a very
small extent pr otein, as ener gy substr ates (22).
Glucose and Glycogen Oxidation
The oxidativ e metabol ism of blood glucose and muscle glycogen
begins with glycolysis. If oxygen is present in sufficient quanti ties,
the end product of glycolysis, pyruvate, is not converted to lactate
but is transported to the mitochondria, where it is converted to
acetyl-CoA (a two-carbon molecule), which enters the Krebs cycle,
also known as the citric acid cycle or tricarbo xylic acid cycle (7, 61).
The Krebs cycle is a series of reactions that continues the oxidation
of the substr ate from glycolysis and produces two ATP indirectly
from guanine triphosphate (GTP), via substrate-lev el
phosphorylation, f or each molecule of glucose ( figure 3.6).
195
FIGURE 3.6 The Krebs cycle. CoA = coenzyme A; FAD2+, FADH, FADH 2 = flavin adenine
dinucleotide; GDP = guanine diphosphate; GTP = guanine triphosphate; NAD+, NADH =
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide.
Also produced from the two pyruvate molecules subsequent to
the production of one molecule of glucose are six molecules of
NADH + H+ and two molecules of reduced flavin adenine
dinucleotide (FADH 2). These molecules transport hydrogen atoms
to the ETC to be used to produce ATP from ADP (22, 109). The ETC
uses the NADH + H+ and FADH 2 molecules to rephosphorylate ADP
to ATP (figure 3.7).
196
FIGURE 3.7  The electr on transport chain (ET C). CoQ = coenzyme Q; Cyt = cytochr ome.
The hydrogen atoms are passed down the chain (a series of
electr on carriers known as cytochromes ) to form a proton
concentr ation gradient, which provides the energy for ATP
production, with oxygen serving as the final electr on acceptor
(resulting in the formation of water). Due to NADH + H+ and FADH 2
entering the ETC at different sites, they differ in the amount of ATP
produced. One molecule of NADH can produce 2.5 molecules of ATP,
whereas one molecule of FADH 2 can only produce 1.5 molecules of
ATP (however, traditional biochemistry often cites that NADH yields 3
ATP and FADH 2 yields 2 ATP [34a]). The production of ATP during
this process is referred to as oxidativ e phosphorylation . The
oxidativ e system, beginning with glycolysis and including the Krebs
cycle and ETC, results in the production of approximately 32 ATP
from the degradation of one molecule of blood glucose (12a, 117a).
Howev er, if the initiation of glycolysis is muscle glycogen, the net
ATP production is slightly higher at 34 ATP, using the malate-
aspartate shuttle system or 32 ATP using the glycerol 3-phosphate
shuttle system  because the first ATP consuming step in glycolysis is
bypassed (12a, 117a). Nevertheless, oxidativ e phosphorylation
accounts for over 90% of ATP synthesis compar ed to substrate-lev el
phosphorylation, which demonstr ates the capaci ty of energy transfer
by the oxidativ e system. See table 3.1 for a summa ry of these
processes.
TABLE 3.1  Total Energy Yield From the Oxidation of
One Glucose Molecule
Process Net ATP production
197
Process Net ATP production
GLYCOLYSIS
Substr ate-lev el phosphorylation (4 A TP pr oduced / 2 A TP
consumed)2*
Oxidativ e phosphorylation:
2 NADH (2.5 A TP each)5
PYRUVATE OXIDATION
2 NADH (2.5 A TP each) 5
KREBS CYCLE (2 ROTATIONS THROUGH THE KREBS CYCLE PER GLUCOSE)
Substr ate-lev el phosphorylation 2
Oxidativ e phosphorylation:
6 NADH (2.5 A TP each)15
Via GTP:
2 FADH 2 (1.5 A TP each)3
TOTAL 32
*Glycolysis consumes 2 ATP (if starting with blood glucose), so net ATP production is 34 −
2 = 32. This figure may also be reported as 30 ATP or as high as 36 depending on which
shuttle system is used to transport the NADH to the mitochondria. ATP = adenosine
triphosphate; FADH2 = flavin adenine dinucleotide; GTP = guanine triphosphate; NADH =
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide.
Fat Oxidation
The oxidativ e energy system can alternativ ely use fats. Triglycerides
stored in fat cells can be broken down by an enzyme,  hormone-
sensitive lipase, to produce free fatty acids and glycerol. The
breakdown releases a portion of the total free fatty acids from the
fat cells into the blood, where they can circulate and enter muscle
fibers and under go oxidation (89, 123). Additional ly, limited
quanti ties of triglycerides are stored within the muscle along with a
form of hormone-sensi tive lipase to produce an intramuscular source
of free fatty acids (22, 47). Free fatty acids enter the mitochondria,
where they under go beta oxidatio n, a series of reactions in which
the free fatty acids are broken down, resulting in the formation of
198
acetyl-CoA and hydrogen protons (figure 3.6). The acetyl-CoA is a
common intermediary entering the Krebs cycle directly, and the
hydrogen atoms are carried by NADH + H+ and FADH 2 to the ETC
(12a, 117a). The result is hundr eds of ATP molecules supplied by
beta oxidation. For example, the breakdown of a single triglyceride
molecule containing three 16-carbon chain free fatty acids (palmi tic
acid) can be metabol ized by beta oxidation to yield over 300 ATP
molecules (>100 ATP per palmi tic acid). The overarching concept is
that fat oxidation is capable of a tremendous capaci ty for ATP
synthesis compar ed to carboh ydrate and pr otein o xidation.
Protein Oxidation
Although not a significant source of energy for most activities,
protein can be broken down into its consti tuent amino acids by
various metabol ic processes. Most of these amino acids can then be
converted into glucose (in a process known as gluconeogenesis ),
pyruvate, or various Krebs cycle intermediates to produce ATP
(figure 3.6). The contribution of amino acids to the production of
ATP has been estimated to be minimal during short-term exercise
but may contribute 3% to 18% of the energy requirements during
prolonged activity (20, 140). The major amino acids that are
oxidized in skeletal muscle are believed to be the branched-chain
amino acids  (leucine, isoleucine, and valine), although alanine,
aspartate, and glutamate may also be used (69). The nitrogenous
waste products of amino acid degradation are eliminated through
the formation of urea and small amounts of ammonia (22). The
elimination through formation of ammonia is significant because
ammonia is to xic and is associated wi th fatigue.
Control of the Oxidative (Aerobic) System
The rate-limiting step (i.e., the slowest reaction) in the Krebs cycle
(figure 3.6) is the conversion of isocitrate to α-ketoglutar ate, a
reaction catalyz ed by the enzyme isocitrate dehydrogenase.
Isocitrate dehydrogenase is stimulated by ADP and allosterical ly
199
inhibi ted by ATP. The reactions that produce NADH + H+ or FADH 2
also influence the regulation of the Krebs cycle. If NAD+ and FAD2+
are not available in sufficient quanti ties to accept hydrogen, the rate
of the Krebs cycle is reduced. Also, when GTP accumulates, the
concentr ation of succinyl CoA increases, which inhibi ts the initial
reaction (oxaloacetate + acetyl-CoA → citrate + CoA) of the Krebs
cycle. The ETC is inhibi ted by ATP and stimulated by ADP (22). A
simplified overview of the metabol ism of fat, carboh ydrate, and
protein is pr esented in figure 3.8.
FIGURE 3.8 The metabolism of fat and that of carboh ydrate and protein share some
common path ways. Note that man y are oxidized to acet yl-CoA and enter the Kr ebs cy cle.
Energy Production and Capacity
The phosphagen, glycolytic, and oxidativ e energy systems differ in
their ability to supply energy for activities of various intensities and
durations (tables 3.2 and 3.3). Exercise intensi ty is often defined in
200