# Section 5.1

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 5: Adaptations to Anaerobic Training

**Section:** 5.1 -- Neural Adaptations

**PDF Pages:** 281--295

CHAPTER  5
ADAPTATIONS TO
ANAEROBIC TRAINING
Brandon Roberts, PhD, and Sean Collins, PhD
The authors would like to acknowledg e the significant contributions of Duncan French
and Nicholas A. R atamess to this chapter .
After completing this chapter, you will be able to
differentiate between aer obic tr aining adaptations and the
anatomical, ph ysiological, and perf ormance adaptations
following anaer obic tr aining;
discuss the centr al and peripher al neur al adaptations to
anaer obic tr aining;
understand how manipulating the acute tr aining v ariables of a
periodiz ed program can al ter bone, muscle structur e, fiber
types, and connectiv e tissue;
explain the acute and chr onic ef fects of anaer obic tr aining on
the endocrine system;
elucidate the chr onic ef fects of anaer obic tr aining on the
cardiovascular system;
understand the detrimental ef fects as a r esult of periods of
detraining; and
discuss how anaer obic tr aining pr ograms ha ve the potential to
enhance muscular str ength, muscular endur ance, power ,
281
flexibi lity and mobi lity, and motor perf ormance.
Characteriz ed by high-intensi ty, intermi ttent bouts of exercise,
anaerobic training  requires adenosine triphosphate (ATP) to be
regener ated at a faster rate than can be produced by oxidativ e
metabol ism alone. Consequently , the energy requirement relies on a
greater proportion of energy coming from non-o xidati ve energy
systems, which include the phosphagen or creatine phosphate
system and a smaller proportion coming from glycolysis.  Thus, the
term anaer obic training  is used in this text to describe exercise
training that is performed at intensi ties that rely primari ly on non-
oxidativ e metabol ism to meet energy demands. Example  modal ities
include resistance training, plyometric drills, speed agility, and
interv al training. Long-term adaptations that occur in response to
anaer obic training are specifically related to the characteristics of the
training program. For example, improvements in muscular strength,
power , hypertr ophy, muscular endur ance, motor skills, and
coordination are all recogniz ed as beneficial adaptations following
anaer obic training modal ities. Finally, while oxidativ e metabol ism
plays a limited role in regener ating ATP during high-intensi ty
anaer obic activities, it still plays a critical role in the recovery of
energy stores during periods of low-intensi ty exercise (recovery) or
rest (49).
Exercises such as sprints and plyometric drills primari ly stress the
phosphagen system; they are usually less than 10 seconds in
duration and minimiz e fatigue by allowing almost complete recovery
between sets (e.g., 5-7 min). Longer -duration, high-intensi ty,
interv al-type training predom inantly uses energy production from the
glycolytic system, in which shorter rest interv als (e.g., 20-60 s) are
adopted during high-intensi ty exercise. The integr ation of high-
intensi ty exercise with short rest periods is consider ed an important
aspect of anaer obic training, because athletes are often required to
perform near-maximal intens ities under fatigued condi tions during
competi tion. It is, howev er, critical that appropriate anaer obic
282
training be programmed and prescribed in such a way as to optimiz e
the physiolog ical adaptations that determine performance.
Competi tive sport requires the complex interaction of all the energy
systems and demonstr ates how each contributes to a varying extent
to fulfill the global metabol ic demands of competi tion ( table 5.1 ).
A wide variety of physical and physiological adaptations are
reported following anaer obic training, and these chang es enable
individuals to improve athletic performance standar ds (table 5.2).
Adaptations include changes to the nervous, muscular , connectiv e
tissue, endocr ine, and cardiovascular systems. They range from
changes that take place in the early phase of training (e.g., one to
four weeks) to those that take place following many years of
consistent training. The majority of resear ch has typical ly dealt with
adaptations in the early to intermediate stages of training (i.e., 4-24
weeks). Understanding how the individual systems of the human
body respond to physical activity using anaer obic metabol ism
provides a knowledge base from which the strength and condi tioning
professional can plan and predict the outcome of a specific training
program to then focus on effectively influencing individual strengths
and weaknesses.
TABLE 5.1  Primary Metabolic Demands of Various
Sports
Sport Phosphagen system Glycolytic system Aerobic system
American f ootbal l High Moder ate Low
Archery High Low —
Basebal l High Low —
Basketball High Moder ate to high Low
Boxing High High Moder ate
Cricket High Low —
Diving High Low —
Note:  All types of metabol ism ar e involved to some extent in al l activi ties.
283
Sport Phosphagen system Glycolytic system Aerobic system
Fencing High Moder ate —
Field ev ents (athletics) High — —
Field hock ey High Moder ate Moder ate
Golf High — Moder ate
Gymnastics High Moder ate —
Ice hock ey High Moder ate Moder ate
Lacrosse High Moder ate Moder ate
Marathon running Low Low High
Mixed martial arts High High Moder ate
Netbal l Moder ate Moder ate High
Powerl ifting High Low —
Rowing Low Moder ate High
Rugby High High Moder ate
Skiing:
Cross-country Low Low High
Downhi ll High High Moder ate
Soccer (f ootbal l) High Moder ate Moder ate
Strongman High Moder ate to high Low
Swimming:
Short distance High Moder ate —
Long distance Low Moder ate High
Tennis High Moder ate Low
Track (athletics):
Sprints High Moder ate —
Middle distance High High Moder ate
Note:  All types of metabol ism ar e involved to some extent in al l activi ties.
284
Sport Phosphagen system Glycolytic system Aerobic system
Long distance — Moder ate High
Ultraendur ance — — High
Volleybal l High Moder ate —
Water polo High High High
Weightl ifting High High Moder ate
Wrestling High Moder ate Low
Note:  All types of metabol ism ar e involved to some extent in al l activi ties.
TABLE 5.2  Physiological Adaptations to Resistance
Training
Variable Resistance training adaptation
PERFORMANCE
Muscular str ength Increases
Muscular endur ance Increases f or high power output
Aerobic power No change or incr eases sl ightly
Anaer obic power Increases
Rate of f orce production Increases
Vertical jump Improved abi lity
Sprint speed Improves
MUSCLE FIBERS
Fiber cr oss-sectional ar ea Increases
Capillary densi ty No change or decr eases
Mitochondrial densi ty Decreases
Myofibrillar densi ty No change
Myofibrillar volume Increases
Cytoplasmic densi ty Increases
ATP = adenosine triphosphate; A TPase = adenosine triphosphatase.
285
Variable Resistance training adaptation
Myosin hea vy chain pr otein Increases
Ribosomal capaci ty No change or incr eases
Ribosomal ef ficiency No change or incr eases
Myonuclear domain Increases
ENZYME ACTIVITY
Creatine phosphokinase Increases
Myokinase Increases
Phosphof ructokinase Increases
Lactate deh ydrogenase No change or v ariable
Sodium–potassium A TPase Increases
METABOLIC ENERGY STORES
Stored ATP Increases
Stored creatine phosphate Increases
Stored gly cogen Increases
Stored trigly cerides May incr ease
CONNECTIVE TISSUE
Ligament str ength May incr ease
Tendon str ength May incr ease
Collagen content May incr ease
Bone densi ty No change or incr eases
BODY COMPOSITION
% body f at Decreases
Fat-free mass Increases
ATP = adenosine triphosphate; A TPase = adenosine triphosphatase.
286
Neural Adaptations
Many anaer obic training modal ities emphasiz e the expression of
muscular speed and power and depend greatly on optimal neural
recruitment for maximal performance (and high quality of training).
Anaer obic training has the potential to elicit long-term adaptations
throughout the neuromuscular system, beginning in the higher brain
centers and continuing down  to the level of individual muscle fibers
(figure 5.1). Neural adaptations are fundamental to optimizing
athletic performance, and increased neural drive is critical to
maximizing the expression of muscular strength and power .
Augmented neural drive is thought to result in increased agonist
(i.e., the major muscles involved in a specific movement or exercise)
motor unit recruitment and potential ly increased neuronal firing rates
(3, 65, 140, 149). In addition, a reduction in inhibi tory mechanisms
(i.e., from Golgi tendon organs) and antagonist coactiv ation are also
thought to occur with long-te rm training (3, 149). While it is not fully
understood how these compl ex responses coexist, it is appar ent that
neural adaptations typical ly occur before any structur al changes in
skeletal muscle ar e appar ent (167).
287
288
FIGURE 5.1  Potential si tes of adaptation wi thin the neur omuscular system.
Central Adaptations
Increased motor unit activation begins in the higher brain centers,
where the intent to produce maximal levels of muscular force and
power causes motor cortex activity to increase (45). As the level of
force develope d rises, or when a new exercise or movement is being
learned, prima ry motor cortex activity is elevated in an effort to
support the enhanced need for neuromuscular function. Adaptations
to anaer obic training methods are then reflected by substantial
neural changes in the spinal cord, particularly along the descending
corticospinal tracts (4). Indeed, after use of anaer obic training
programs, agonist voluntary activation and the recruitment of high-
threshold motor units has been shown to be elevated in association
with an improved skeletal muscle force production (130) . This is in
comparison to what is seen in untrained individuals (3), in whom the
ability to maximal ly recruit motor units is limited. In those
rehabi litating from injury , electrical stimulation has been shown to be
more effective than voluntary contractions for eliciting strength gains
(41). Other resear ch has shown that only 71% of muscle tissue is
activated during maximal ef forts in untr ained populations (7).
Adaptations of Motor Units
The functional unit of the neuromuscular system is the motor unit.
Consisting of the alpha motor neuron and the muscle fibers that it
activates, a motor unit may innerv ate <10 muscle fibers for small,
intricate muscl es or >100 fibers for large, powerf ul trunk and limb
muscles. To maximiz e the expression of muscle force, large
increases in synaptic input to the motor unit pool are necessary to
cause the recruitment of all available motor units and to drive the
dischar ge rate of these motor units to their optimal frequency . This
association of motor unit recruitment and dischar ge rate modulation
allows for the ability to finely grade muscle force production.
289
Therefore, changes in the firing rate (or dischar ge rate) of the motor
unit also affect muscle force gener ation. With increased motor unit
firing rates, the muscle fibers are continual ly activated by
subsequent action potentials before the fibers have time to
completely relax following a prior action potential. Therefore,
increasing motor unit firing rates enhances the summation of
successiv e muscle twitches, which is expressed as augmented
contractile strength (1). Increases in motor unit firing rates
represent a potential adaptive mechanism that correlates with
improvements in strength in response to resistance training (166).
Gains in maximal strength and power of agonist muscles are
gener ally associated with an increase in recruitment; an increased
rate of firing; greater motor unit synchr onization of neural dischar ge
intra-muscularly , and improved inter-muscle coordination , which is
the learned motor behavior coordinating the activity of multiple
muscles in syner gy during movement (40a, 148); or a combination
of all these f actors.
The recruitment or decrui tment of motor units in an orderly
manner is governed by Henneman’ s size principle  (figure 5.2),
which represents the relationship between motor unit twitch force
and recruitment threshold (140). According to this principle, motor
units are recruited in an ascending order according to their soma
size. Thus, motor units with small motor neurons have lower
recruitment thresholds than do motor units with large motor
neurons. High-thr eshold motor units are gener ally quick to fatigue
but have greater force-producing ability. The recruitment threshold
of a motor unit also determines its firing rate characteristics, and
thus there is an inverse association between motor unit recruitment
threshold and a motor unit’s typical firing rate. This arrangement
provides several advantages, including the ability to precisely
gradate force production—particularly at low levels of force
production— as wel l as enhanced f atigue r esistance (29a, 38a).
290
FIGURE 5.2 Graphic representation of the size principle, according to which motor units
are organized based on the size of the neuronal soma. Low-threshold motor units are
recruited first and have lower force capabilities than higher -threshold motor units. Typical ly,
to get to the high-thr eshold motor units, the body must first recruit the lower -threshold
motor uni ts.
With heavy resistance training, all muscle fibers get larger (158,
159) because for the most part they are all recruited in order to
produce the higher levels of force required to lift progressively
heavier loads. It has similarly been shown that lifting lower loads
near or to volitional failure can promote substantial hypertr ophy of
all fibers, because fatigue similarly demands progressive recruitment
of fibers associated with higher -threshold motor units (121a, 122a).
Maximal force production not only requires the recruitment of a
maximum percentage of available motor units, including the high-
threshold motor units, but also relies on the recruitment occurring at
very high firing frequencies, which promotes summation of muscle
fiber twitch forces and consequently augments the magni tude of
contractile activity. Once a motor unit is recruited, less synaptic input
is needed in order for it to be re-recruited (e.g., its recruitment
threshold decreases) (65). This phenomenon may have important
ramifications for strength and power training, because all motor
291
units, but especial ly high-thr eshold units, may be more readily
reactiv ated subsequent to prior r ecruitment.
In addition to requiring the recruitment of a large number of
available motor units, maximal force production also necessi tates
that these motor units fire at very high frequencies. This rapid firing
promotes summation of the muscle fiber twitch forces, thereby
amplifying the overall contractile activity. Studies have demonstrated
that during maximal force contractions, motor neurons dischar ge at
their highest rates, particularly in the early phases of the contraction
when cortical input is dominant and afferent feedback  from the
muscle is minimal. This is especial ly evident during explosiv e, or
ballistic, contractions when motor units are recruited in a precise,
orderly sequence, with most units activated before a significant rise
in force output. Consequently , even under condi tions demanding
rapid force, the recruitment of motor units adher es to an ordered
pattern that prioritizes high-threshold motor units when  maximum
force is required. This orderly yet rapid recruitment pattern may be a
key factor in developing strength and power , because it enables the
reactiv ation of motor units, especial ly high-thr eshold ones, with
reduced synaptic input after ini tial activ ation (40b).
With heavy resistance training, all muscle fiber s get
larger (i.e., hypertrophy) because more motor units are
recruited to produce high levels of force.
Another critical element of adaptation in neural recruitment is the
level of tissue activation that results from chronic resistance training
for muscle hypertr ophy (26a, 80a). Resear ch has shown that as
muscle hypertr ophies, it does not require as much neural activation
to lift a given submaximal load. Ploutz and colleagues (134) reported
that fewer quadriceps muscle fibers were activated when subjects
lifted a fixed submaximal load following nine weeks of resistance
training, which also caused a 5% increase in muscle size.
Additional ly, following resistance training at high loads (80% 1RM),
292
the neural adaptation is greater, resulting in a lower neural output to
produce the same submaximal force, even with similar hypertr ophy
to low-load (30% 1RM) resistance training (80a). Such results
demonstr ate the importance of progressive overloading during
resistance training and how it promotes the activation of an optimal
amount of muscle tissue to meet f orce production r equirements.
Other motor unit adaptations include changes in the rate and
sequence of firing. A positive relationship exists between the
magni tude of force produced and the rate of motor unit firing; high
firing rates from the onset of ballistic muscle contraction are
especial ly critical to increased rates of force development (3). The
increase in firing rate (vs. recruitment) appears to depend on muscle
size and the number of motor units that compose the muscle, such
that smaller muscles rely more on an increased firing rate to
enhance force production, whereas larger muscles depend more on
recruitment (61). Evidence suggests that anaer obic training can play
a role in enhancing firing rates of recruited motor units (3). For
example, resistance training may result in a more synchr onized
pattern (i.e., the firing of two or more motor units at a fixed interv al)
of activation during the exertion of large forces, rather than the
customary asynchr onous pattern usually common to motor function
(149). Although the specific role of motor unit synchr onization
during anaer obic training remains to be fully elucidated,
synchr onization is potential ly more critical to the rate of force
development and less significant concerning the overall level of force
developed.
Neuromuscular Junc tion
The neuromuscular junction (NMJ)  is the interface between the
nerve and the skeletal muscle fibers, and it represents another
potential site for neural adaptation following anaer obic training (42,
43). Because of the difficulty in investigating this structur e, most
studies examining the NMJ have used animal models to demonstr ate
its adaptation to exercise. Deschenes and colleagues (44) examined
293
the impact of high-intensi ty versus low-intensi ty treadmi ll exercise
training on NMJ in the soleus muscle of rats. Following both high-
and low-intens ity running, the total area of the NMJ was found to
increase. High-intensi ty training, howev er, resulted in more
dispersed, irregular -shaped synapses and a greater total length of
nerve terminal branching compar ed to low-intensi ty training. In
another study, greater end-p late perimeter length and area, as well
as greater dispersion of acetylchol ine receptors within the end-plate
region, were also found after seven weeks of resistance training
(43). These adaptations suggest that anaer obic training induces
beneficial morphological changes in the NMJ that are conduciv e to
enhanced neur al transmission capabi lities.
Neuromuscular Reflex Potentiation
Anaer obic training causes positive changes in the reflex (i.e., muscle
spindle or stretch reflex) response of the neuromuscular system and
enhances the magni tude and rate of force development via this
reflex. This myotatic reflex  also harnesses the involuntary elastic
properties of the muscle and connectiv e tissue (e.g., the series
elastic component) and acts to positively increase force production.
Resistance training in particu lar has been shown to increase reflex
potentiation by between 19% and 55% (5). Furthermor e, resistance-
trained athletes (e.g., weightl ifters and bodybui lders) are found to
have greater reflex potentiat ion in the soleus muscle compared to
untrained individuals (143).
Anaerobic Training and Electromyography
Studies
Electromyography (EMG)  is a common resear ch tool used to
examine the magni tude of neural activation within skeletal muscle.
Two kinds of EMG are commonly used in resear ch and applied
settings: surface EMG and intramuscular (needle or fine wire) EMG.
Surface EMG requires the placement of adhesiv e electr odes on the
surface of the skin where they can monitor a large area of
294
underlying muscle (131). Surface EMG is often more effective for
monitoring superficial muscle , because it is unable to detect deeper
muscle activity. Also, the more body fat an individual has, the
weaker the EMG signal will be because body fat acts as a low-pass
filter. In comparison, with intramuscular EMG, the skin surface is
numbed, and a needle electrode, or a needle containing two fine-
wire electrodes, is inserted through the skin and positioned into the
belly of the muscle itself. Fine-wire electr odes emphasiz e a specificity
of assessment in that they are located in a muscle of interest and
accurately record localized motor unit action potentials (75). Because
of its invasiveness, intramuscular EMG is primari ly adopted in
resear ch settings or under clinical condi tions. While it is often
difficult to determine the specific underpinning mechanism(s) (i.e.,
increased recruitment, discharge rate, or synchr onizat ion; Golgi
tendon organ inhibi tion) affecting EMG output, an increase in EMG
signal indicates gr eater neur omuscular activi ty.
An important consider ation when examining the neuromuscular
system is an individual’ s training status. Neural adaptations
(impr oved motor learning and coordination) predominate in the early
phase of training without substantial concomi tant increases in
muscle hypertr ophy (61). It appears that as an individual’ s training
status advances, an interpla y exists between neural and
hypertr ophic mechanisms that contribute to further gains in strength
and power .
Sale reported that dramatic increases in neural adaptation take
place in the early part of a training program (6-10 weeks) (140). As
the duration of training increases (>10 weeks), when muscle
hypertr ophy becomes more observ able, it is these structur al changes
that contribute  to strength and power gains more than neural
adaptations (40c). Eventual ly, muscle hypertr ophy plateaus as an
accommodation to the training load occurs. Howev er, at that time, if
an athlete incorpor ates new variation or progressive overload into
the training plan, neural adaptations will once again contribute to
the performance improvements by acting to tolerate the new
295