# Section 5.2

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 5: Adaptations to Anaerobic Training

**Section:** 5.2 -- Muscular Adaptations

**PDF Pages:** 296--310

physical insult from training. This pattern is replicated with every
stepwise chang e in the training demand, and as athletes progress in
training, the type of program used may be one of the most
important factors to consider (72). Neural factors are especial ly
important for strength gains in programs that use very high training
intensi ties (>80% 1RM) (80a).
Electr omyography studies have also yielded some interesting
findings r egarding neur al adaptations to anaer obic tr aining:
Exercising muscle under going unilateral resistance training
produces increased strength and neural activity in the
contralater al resting muscle, a phenomenon known as cross-
education  (79). A literature review has shown that strength
in the untrained limb may increase up to 22%, with an
average strength increase of approximately 8% following
training periods ranging from 4 to 12 weeks (125). The
increase in strength of the untrained limb is accompanied by
greater EMG activity in that limb (154), thereby suggesting
that a central neural adaptation accounts for most of the
strength gains, considering no change or reduction in the
cross-sectional area (CSA)  of muscle during the unilateral
training period (22, 139).
Unilateral strength, via cross-education, increases even when
limbs are trained at different intensi ties and during detraining
periods (22). The cross-education effect does appear to be
load dependen t, with untrained limb strength improving when
the contralater al trained limb performs higher -load (8RM-
12RM) intensi ties (22). Furthermor e, the untrained limb
strength improvements will also benefi t if the untrained limb
performs low-load (30RM-40RM) work while the trained limb
performs high-load (8RM-12RM) synchr onously , but not if the
trained limb performs traditional unilateral work under low-
load intensi ties (30RM-40RM) (22).
In untrained individuals, a bilateral deficit  is evident. The
force produced when both limbs contract together is lower
296
than the sum of the forces they produce when contracting
unilaterally. Resear ch has shown that the corresponding EMG
activity is lower during bilateral contractions (61), sugge sting
that neural mechanisms are, at least in part, a contributing
factor. With longitudinal bilateral training, the magni tude of the
bilateral deficit is reduced. In fact, trained or stronger
individuals often show a bilateral facilitation  effect whereby
an increase in voluntary activation of the agonist muscle
groups is observ ed during bi lateral contr action (64a).
The EMG activity of antagoni st muscle groups has been shown to
change in response to anaer obic training during agonist movements.
In most instan ces, cocontr action of antagonist muscles serves as a
protectiv e mechanism to increase joint stability and reduce the risk
of injury (96). Howev er, when too much antagonist activity opposes
agonist movement, it inappr opriately diminishes net force production
at a joint.
A number of studies have shown reduced antagonist coactiv ation
following resistance training, resulting in an increase in net force
without an increase in agonist motor unit recruitment (71, 130).
Sprint and plyometric training have also been shown to alter the
timing of coactiv ation (86), although the specific role of altering
antagonist coactiv ation patterns remains unclear . Greater antagonist
activity may be observ ed during ballistic movements that require
high levels of joint stability or when people are unfamiliar with a task
and require more inherent stability (48). Antagonist activity has been
reported to increase during unstable exercise activity with
subsequent reduction in agonist activity (19, 144). Behm and
colleagues (19) demonstr ated that completing leg exten sion while
seated on a Swiss ball (i.e., an unstable surface) resulted in 44%
lower quadriceps activation but 29% greater hamstring activation
when compar ed to a stable condi tion. Thus, leg extension forces
were 70% lower in unstable than stable condi tions.
Similarly, Santana and colleagues (144) demonstr ated that
pressing in a stable (bench press) versus unstable (standing cable
297
press) position requires an increase in antagonist, syner gist, and
core stabilization activation during the unstable condi tion. In
contrast, agonist activation is greater during the stable condi tion
with little effect on antagonis t activation. The changes in agonist and
antagonist activation result in the attenuation of force production. It
has been shown that strength (1RM) performance is decreased in an
unstable free-weight squat compar ed to a stable free-weight squat
(116). Similarly, peak force (N) and rate of force developm ent (RFD)
have also been found to be significantly reduced during unstable
squat ting versus stable squat ting (115). Additional ly, when
considering the type of instabi lity appar atus, individual training
status may be an important consider ation. For example, among
highly resistance-tr ained individuals, appar atuses that create
moder ate instability (e.g., Swiss ball, Dyna disc, and wobble board)
did not substantial ly alter muscle activation. It is possible that this
finding could be due to the highly trained individuals’ familiarity and
experience with unstable training condi tions, but this is a hypothesis
that must be tested (171).
298
Muscular Adaptations
Skeletal muscl e adaptations  following anaer obic training occur in
both structur e and function,  with reported changes encompassing
increases in fiber size, fiber type transitions, and enhanced
biochemical and ultrastructur al components (i.e., muscle
architectur e, enzyme activity, and substr ate conce ntrations).
Collectively, these adaptations result in enhanced performance
characteristics that include strength, power , and muscular
endur ance, al l of which ar e critical to athletic suc cess.
Muscular Growth
Muscle hypertrophy  is the term given to the enlargement of
muscle fiber cross-sectional area (CSA) following training. A positive
relationship exists between  hypertr ophy and the expression of
muscular strength (162). Biological ly, the process of hypertr ophy
involves an increase in the net accretion (i.e., an increase in
synthesis, reduction in degradation, or both) of the contractile
proteins actin  and myosin  within the myofibril, as well as an
increase in the number of myofibrils within a muscle fiber. In
addition to these contractile proteins, other structur al proteins such
as titin and nebulin  are also synthesiz ed proportionately to the
myofilament changes. The new myofilaments are added to the
periphery of the myofibril and result in an increase in its diameter .
The cumulativ e effect of these additions is an enlargement of the
fiber and, collectively, the size of the muscle or muscle group itself.
During exposur e to mechanical loading (e.g., resistance training), a
series of intracellular processes regulate gene expression and
subsequently pr omote incr eased pr otein synthesis (138).
Mechanical deformation of muscle stimulates various proteins
independent of hormone concentr ations, and these proteins have
been shown to increase in activity before evidence of muscle
hypertr ophy appears. In particular , mechanical tissue deformation
activates the protein kinase B (Akt)–mammal ian target of rapam ycin
299
(mTOR) pathway, the adenosine monophosphate– activated protein
kinase (AMPK) pathway, and the mitogen- activated protein kinase
(MAPK) pathway. Of these, the Akt/mT OR pathway in particular is
important in directly regulating adaptations to resistan ce training
(18, 45). When muscle fibers contract, Akt/mT OR signal ing increases
dramatical ly, and this response is critical for increasing muscle
protein synthesis and subsequent growth (a process known as
myogenesis ). At the same time, the downr egulation of inhibi tory
growth factors (e.g., myostatin) suggests that resistanc e exercise
significantly affects a plethor a of growth-signal ing and breakdown
pathways (23, 87, 89, 145). Protein synthetic rates are elevated after
acute resistance exercise and remain elevated for up to 48 hours
(109, 133). The magni tude of increased protein synthesis depends
on a variety of factors including whether someone is trained or
untrained, carboh ydrate and protein intake, amino acid availability,
timing of nutrient intake, mechanical stress of the workout, muscle
cell hydration levels, and the anabol ic hormonal and subsequent
receptor r esponse (14 , 36, 91).
The process of hypertrophy involves both an increase in
the synthesis of the contractile proteins actin and
myosin within the myofibril and an increase in the
number of myofibrils within the muscle fiber itself. The
new myofilaments are added to the external layers of
the myofibril, increasing its diameter.
Exercise-induced muscle damage (EIMD)  and disruption  of
myofibrils and the uniform structur e of muscle fiber sarcomer es
following high-intensi ty anaer obic training (e.g., resistance training)
also have a marked effect on muscle growth (35). The initial
resistance exercise-induced stress in untrained individua ls disrupts
muscle homeostasis, leading to morphological change s such as
cytosk eletal disturbances (e.g., Z-band streaming); loss of
sarcomeric structur al proteins (e.g., desmin and dystrophin);
300
segmental necrosis of muscle fibers; and alterations in connectiv e
tissue, T-tubules, and the sarcoplasmic reticulum. These
morphological changes can result directly from mechan ical stress
during exercise or subsequently from calcium-sensi tive degradation
pathways and inflammatory responses. EIMD damage is most
pronounced after the first resistance training session and diminishes
rapidly as training continues, becoming negligible after 10 weeks of
consistent resistance training (27, 37). The structur al changes
associated with EIMD influence gene expression in an effort to
strengthen muscle tissue and protect it from further damage. The
repair and remodel ing process itself may involve a host of regulatory
mechanisms (e.g., hormonal, immune, and metabol ic) that interact
with the training status of the individual (90). Howev er, it is
understood that both the inflammatory responses and increased
protein turno ver (i.e., increased net protein synthesis)  ultimately
contribute to long-term hypertr ophic adaptations. The sequence of
protein synthesis involves (a) water uptak e, (b) noncontr actile
protein synthe sis, and (c) contractile protein synthesis (166). At the
same time, reduced degradation acts to maintain the size of fibers
by reducing net pr otein loss.
After the initiation of a heavy resistance training program,
changes in the type of muscle proteins (e.g., fast myosin heavy
chains) start to take place within several workouts (158). Howev er,
muscle fiber hypertr ophy requires a longer period of training (3-4
weeks of 9-12 workouts) before significant changes in CSA become
detectable (40, 150). The hypertr ophic process leading to a rise in
CSA will have been occurrin g molecularly since the initial training
stimulus, but is only observ able when those alterations become
measur able. As with initial gains in performance variables (e.g.,
strength and power), hypertr ophic responses are at their greatest in
the early stages, after which the rate of muscle growth diminishes
over time (72). Athletes studied across two years of heavy resistance
training showed increases in strength that paralleled optimal training
301
intensi ties, although muscle fiber hypertr ophy contributed little to
increased l ifting perf ormance (72).
The magni tude of hypertr ophy ultimately depends on the training
stimulus and how the acute training variables are prescribed. To
optimiz e muscle growth, appropriate training periodization is
essential for maximizing the combination of mechanical and
metabol ic stimul i. Mechanical factors include the lifting of heavy
loads or low to moder ate loads at near-momentary muscular failure,
with or without the inclusion of eccentric muscle actions (159a), and
moder ate to high training volumes (95), all of which are
characteristic of typical resistance training prescriptions for muscle
strength and hypertr ophy. An increasing amount of evidence also
supports the use of novel training modal ities (e.g., occlusion
training) as alternativ e methods of inducing appropriate mechanical
or metabol ic stress. Metabol ic factors center on low- to moder ate-
intensi ty or moder ately high-intensi ty training with high volumes and
short rest interv als (characteristic of bodybui lding training) (39,
136). Collectively, mechanical factors result in optimal recruitment of
muscle fibers (because muscle fibers need to be recruited before
growth), growth factor expression, and potential disruption to the
sarcomer es, all of which increase muscle CSA (63). The metabol ic
factors stress the glycolytic energy system and result in increased
metabol ites that may be involved in muscle growth. These programs
also el icit the most potent anabol ic hormone r esponse (96).
Also proposed as a mechanism for increasing muscle size, and
something that has been debated by exercise scientists for years, is
hyperplasia. Hyperplasia  is the term given to an increase in the
number of muscle fibers via longitudinal fiber splitting in response to
high-intensi ty resistance training. Hyperplasia has been shown to
occur in animals (13, 64, 77), but the findings are controversial in
humans, with some studies supporting (108, 111, 114, 165) and
others rejecting its occurrence in humans (110). Part of the reason
for this confusion may arise from cross-sectional studies comparing
resistance-tr ained athletes to untrained individuals, showing a
302
greater number of fibers in trained populations. In this scenario it is
difficult to determine if the difference is due to preexisting,
pretraining differences in fiber number (i.e., due to genetics) or due
to training-induced hyperplasia. One must also consider that the
procedur es scientists perform on animals simply cannot be
completed in humans for ethical and logistical reasons.
Consequently , some of the more convincing data supporting skeletal
muscle hyperplasia emerge from animal studies (64, 77). When
examining hyperplasia in animal models, resear chers remove whole
muscle and strip back the fascia in order to analyz e muscle fiber
numbers longitudinal ly under a microscope. In humans, removal of
whole muscle is not feasible. Instead, needle biopsy techniques are
used to harvest a small sample of muscle tissue, which is then
examined in cross section, and fiber number calculations are
performed indirectly using extrapolation mathematics. While
hyperplasia cannot be completely ruled out, it does not appear to be
a major  strategy for muscle tissue adaptation to resistance training,
and, if it occurs at all, it involves only a small amount of the added
tissue (maybe less than 10%) if the condi tions are optim al. It may
be hypothesiz ed that if hyperplasia occurs, it may be in response to
muscle fibers reaching a theoretical upper limit in size, which may
occur in athletes using anabol ic steroids and other growth agents or
under going long-term training that produces large to extreme levels
of hypertr ophy. This remains to be fully elucidated and continues to
be an ar ea of contention among scienti fic resear chers.
Fiber Type–Specific Size Changes
The magnitude of muscle  hypertr ophy experienced following
anaer obic training is associated with muscle fiber type. Muscle fibers
must be activated in order to promote significant hypertr ophy (38).
During resistan ce training, both type I and type II muscle fibers
have the poten tial to be recruited, and only via activation do type I
or type II fibers receive a signal ing mechanism that initiates the
cascade of regulatory processes promoting protein synthesis.
303
Because there is an appar ent alignment of the functional
characteristics of fiber types (e.g., fiber size, force capaci ty, and
fatigue resista nce) and motor unit properties, such that in mixed
muscles low-threshold moton eurons typical ly innerv ate type I fibers
and high-thr eshold motoneur ons innerv ate type II fibers, it is
necessary that high-f orce and/or high-f atigue condi tions are used to
maximiz e phenotypic adaptations across all fiber types. Accordingly ,
significant and consistent activation via a consistent training stimulus
at appropriate volume is necessary for the initiation  of these
adaptiv e processes to translate to significant hypertrophy as
observ ed by enlarged CSA of the intact muscle. Typical ly, type II
fibers manifest greater increases in size than type I fibers; thus the
magni tude of hypertr ophy is not uniform between the two major
fiber types (68). In fact, it has been argued that the ultimate
potential for hypertr ophy may reside in the relative proportion of
type II fibers within a given athlete’ s muscles (165). That is, athletes
who possess a relatively large proportion of fast-twitch fibers may
have a greater potential for increasing muscle mass than individuals
possessing pr edominantly slow -twitch fibers.
Fiber Type Transitions
The pattern of neural stimulation dictates the extent to which fiber
type adaptatio ns occur following anaer obic training. Muscle fibers
are theoretically positioned on a continuum from the least oxidativ e
to the most oxidativ e type (see figure 5.3 and the description of
muscle fiber types in chapter 1). The continuum is as follows: IIx,
IIax, IIa, IIac, IIc, Ic, and I, with a concomi tant myosin heavy chain
(MHC) expression (i.e., MHC IIx, IIa, and I) (11, 157). Although the
proportions of type I and II fibers are partial ly genetical ly
determined (132, 154a), changes within each subtype can occur
following anaer obic training. With training and activation of the high-
threshold motor units, a transition from type IIx to IIa fiber type
occurs (26). In other words, type IIx muscle fibers change their
myosin adenosine triphosphatase (ATPase) isoform content and
304
progressively become more oxidativ e IIa fibers. In fact, resear ch has
shown nearly full transitions from type IIx to IIa fiber profiles
following the combination of high-intensi ty resistance and aerobic
endur ance tr aining (94).
FIGURE 5.3 Muscle fiber transitions occur during training, and these changes are not
influenced by sex (17, 158). This means that a shift of the type of myosin adenosine
triphosphatase (ATPase) and heavy chains takes place during training. Transformations from
IIx to IIax to IIa can be seen, and then small percentages change to IIac and IIc. Exercise
activities that recruit motor units with type IIx muscle fibers initiate a shift toward IIa
fibers.
On consistent activation, type IIx fibers change into a more
oxidativ e form along the continuum (i.e., to an intermediate fiber
type IIax and then to a IIa) (26). Any change in the muscle fiber
type continuum and associate d MHCs occurs in the early stages of a
resistance training program. In an early study, Staron and colleagues
(158) examined the effects of a high-intensi ty resistance training
protocol (multiple sets of the squat, leg press, and knee extension
exercises using 6RM to 12RM loads and 2-min rest periods)
performed by men and wome n two times per week for eight weeks.
They reported a significant decrease in the type IIx percentage in
women after just two weeks of training (four workouts) and in the
men after four weeks of training (eight workouts). Over the eight-
week training program, type IIx fiber types decreased from
approximately 18% to about 7% of the total muscle fibers in both
men and women. Analysis of the MHCs showed that in this early
phase of training, the proportion of IIx MHCs shifted toward IIa
MHCs. Interestingly , detraining has the opposi te effect, resulting in
an increase in type IIx fibers and a reduction in type IIa fibers (132),
with a possible overshoot of type IIx fibers (i.e., higher IIx
305
percentages than observ ed pretraining [11]). While transformation
within muscle fiber subtypes appears typical, transformation from
type I to type II or vice versa appears less probable, most likely due
to differing MHC isoforms and relative oxidativ e enzyme content
(132). Whether these transformations are possible remain s doubtf ul,
because insufficient evidence is currently available. These
possibi lities need to be explor ed in future studies; it is intriguing to
consider whether the continuum of adaptations extends beyond type
I and II subpopulations, especial ly in extreme cases in which a
marathon runner (high percentage of type I fibers) follows a high-
intensi ty resistance training program or a powerl ifter (high
percentage of type II fibers) begins an extensiv e aerobic endur ance
training pr ogram.
Structural and Architectural Changes
Pennate muscle has fascicles that attach obliquely (in a slanted
position) to its tendon. Pennation angle  affects the force
production capabi lities as well as the range of motion of a muscle.
Larger pennation angles can also accommodate greater protein
deposi tion and allow for greater increases in CSA (2). In pennate
muscle, resistance training has been shown to increase the angle of
pennation, with strength-tr ained athletes displa ying larger pennation
angles in the triceps brachii and vastus lateralis muscles compar ed to
untrained individuals (2). Additional ly, fascicle length has been
shown to be greater in strength-tr ained athletes (84), and fascicle
length of the gastrocnemius and vastus lateralis has been found to
be greater in sprinters compar ed to distance runners  (6). The
combination of resistance, sprint, and jump training have been
shown to increase rectus femoris fascicle length, and sprint and
jump training have been shown to increase vastus lateralis fascicle
length (24). These architectural changes have a positive effect on
the manner in which force is ultimately transmi tted to tendons and
bones.
306
Other Muscular Adaptations
Resistance training has been shown to increase myofibrillar volume
(107), cytoplasmic density (111), sarcoplasmic reticulum and T-
tubule density (9), sodium–potassium ATPase activity (67), and
increased ribosome biogenes is (54, 172). Collectively, these changes
act to facilitate hypertr ophy and enable greater expression of
muscular strength. Sprint training has been shown to enhance
calcium release  (129), which assists in increasing speed and power
production b y promoting actin and m yosin cr ossbridge f ormation.
Heavy resistance training has also been shown to reduce
mitochondrial density (112). While the number of mitochondria
remains constant or can slightly increase throughout a training
phase, mitochondrial density is expressed relative to muscle area.
Increases in muscle CSA occur disproportionately to mitochondrial
proliferation, and consequently , the density of mitochondria per unit
volume is typical ly found to decrease with hypertr ophy. Muscle
hypertr ophy can result in decreased capillary density by similar
mechanisms, again with the number of capillaries per fiber
increasing somewhat (168, 184). Bodybui lding workouts produce
large hydrogen ion concentr ations, but having more capillaries per
fiber may assist in the clearance of metabol ites from exercising
muscle (93, 164).
Anaer obic exercise results in substantial reductions in muscle and
blood pH (32), with several mechanisms regulating a change in
acid–base balance during exercise. With adaptations to consistent
acute changes in pH during training (i.e., increased H+
concentr ation), buffering capaci ty can improve. This increased
capaci ty then allows an athlete to better tolerate the accumulation of
H+ within the working muscle , resulting in delayed fatigue and
greater muscular endur ance (152). By its nature, high-intensi ty
interv al training (e.g., sprints and cycling) performed above the
lactate threshold has been shown to significantly increase buffering
capaci ty by 16% to 38% (21, 152). Elsewher e, athletes competing in
anaer obic team sports have been shown to have higher buffering
307
capaci ty than endur ance athletes and untrained control subjects
(52).
Within skeletal muscle, substr ate content and enzyme  activity
represent additional areas of adaptation in response to anaer obic
training. Most notably , when ATP and creatine phosphate (CP)
concentr ations are repeatedly exhausted following bouts of
intermi ttent high-intensi ty muscular contraction, the storage capaci ty
of these high-ener gy compounds is increased  via a
super compensation effect. MacDougal l and colleagues (113)
reported a 28% increase in resting CP and an 18% increase in ATP
concentr ations following five months of resistance training  (i.e., 3 to
5 sets of 8-10 repetitions with 2-min rest periods). In addition, it
appears that bodybui lding-st yle programs such as this, which stress
fast glycolysis, may also be a potent stimulus for the enhancement
of gly cogen content, which w as found to incr ease up to 112% (113).
308
Connective Tissue Adaptations
Bones, tendons, ligaments, fascia, and cartilage are examples of
connectiv e tissue. Anaer obic exercise imparts mechanical forces that
cause deformation of specific regions of the skeleton. These forces,
created by muscular actions  on the tendinous insertion into bone,
can be bending, compr essive, or torsional. In response to
mechanical loading , osteoblasts  migrate to the bone surface
and begin bone model ing (figure 5.4). Osteoblasts manuf acture and
secrete proteins—primari ly collagen molecules—that are deposi ted in
the spaces between bone cells to increase strength. These proteins
form the bone matrix  and eventual ly become miner alized as
calcium phosph ate crystals (hydroxyapatite ). New bone formation
occurs predominantly on the outer surface of the bone
(periosteum ), incr easing diameter and str ength.
309
FIGURE 5.4 Bone modeling in response to mechanical loading.  (a) Application of a
longitudinal weight -bearing force causes the bone to bend (as depicted by the dotted line),
creating a stimulus for new bone formation at the regions experiencing the greatest
deformation.  (b) Osteoblasts lay down additional collagen fibers at the site. (c) Previously
dormant osteoblasts migrate to the area experiencing the strain. (d) The collagen fibers
become miner alized, and the bone diameter ef fectively incr eases.
Genera l Bone Physiology
The rate of bone adaptation occurs differently in the axial (skull-
cranium, vertebr al column, ribs, and sternum) and appendicular
(shoulder girdle, pelvis, and bones of the upper and lower
extremities) skeleton, owing to differing amounts of trabecular
(spongy) bone  and cortical  (compact) bone . Cortical bone is
dense and forms a compact outer shell surrounding the trabecular
bone, with the two types of bone linked by interlocking narrow and
delicate plates of trabecular bone. The spaces between the
310