# Section 6.2

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 6: Adaptations to Aerobic Training

**Section:** 6.2 -- Aerobic Endurance Training Adaptations

**PDF Pages:** 356--370

•  Aerobic power (maximal oxygen uptake).  Arguably the most significant
change in physiological variables with aerobic exercise training is an increase in
maximal oxygen uptak e (V̇O2max), the criterion index of cardiovascular fitness.
The V̇O2max is determined in part by genet ics and by the training program
undertak en by the athlete. Elite athletes may show minor changes in V̇O2max with
training (5%-10%), while untrained individuals may increase V̇O2max by as much
as 20% (67, 75). A high V̇O2max coupled with increased lactate threshold allows
enhanced performance for running sports as well as sports requiring intermi ttent
sprinting (soc cer, bask etball, and other team sports).
•  Lactate threshold.  Aerobic training increases the absolute lactate threshold,
allowing the highly trained individual to work at both a higher relative and absolute
percentage of his or her V̇O2max than a less-tr ained individual. This increased
tolerance of lactate translates into a variety of performance outcomes; these
include running at a higher percentage of V̇O2max for a race (resulting in reduced
time), covering more distance during a game, enhanced recovery for secon d-half
performance, and working at higher exercise intensi ties throughout an event. The
importance of having a high lactate threshold can be seen in the following
example. Two individuals can have the same V̇O2max, perhaps 50 mL · kg−1 ·
min−1; however, if one has a lactate threshold of 80% of V̇O2max (i.e., threshold
occurs at 40 mL · kg−1 · min−1) whereas the other’s occurs at 70% (i.e., 35 mL ·
kg−1 · min−1), the first individual will be able to maintain a power output
equiv alent to 5 mL · kg−1· min−1 higher than the second individual. All other things
being equal, such as exercise econom y, this would result in a greater speed of
movement and thus superior perf ormance.
•  Effective use of substrate.  Carboh ydrates are the preferred source of fuel
for high-intensi ty intermi ttent exercise in many team sports. Aerobic exercise
training results in a greater use of fat as a substr ate for exercise with a relative
sparing of carboh ydrate. With a sparing of carboh ydrate (i.e., reduced glycogen
depletion), an aerobic endur ance-tr ained individual can maintain higher -intensi ty
exercise for longer periods of time. Aerobic exercise may be further improved
through various carboh ydrate-loading  manipulations to increase endogenous
glycogen stor es (19).
•  Muscle fiber adaptations.  When muscle fibers are examined cross-
sectional ly, elite distance runners have a higher proportion (percentage) of type I
fibers, and the available type I fibers  are functional ly very efficient for aerobic
metabol ism (increased mitochondrial density and oxidativ e enzyme capaci ty [69]
and capillary network for oxygen delivery). Aerobic exercise training, especial ly
long-distance and high-intensi ty interm ittent exercise, results in an increase in the
oxidativ e capacity of type I fibers. Resear ch indicates that after a period of aerobic
endur ance training such as marathon training, there is a shift toward type I fibers
associated with the higher volume of aerobic endur ance training. The oxidativ e
phenot ype type I/IIa fibers also increase, while type IIa and IIa/x decrease in both
vastus lateralis and soleus. Howev er, it should be consider ed that certain muscles
356
may have a highe r propensi ty for fiber shifting and other factors such as the
tapering or other phase of training may affect these shifts (125, 102). From a
performance standpoint, these metab olic and fiber changes result in a more
efficient use of aer obic ener gy production.
•  Exercise economy.  The economy of exercise is mostly  a function of
biomechanics and technique, which are influenced by the athlete’ s metabol ic,
cardiovascular , and neuromuscular efficiency and training (7). Two aerobic
endur ance athletes may have the same maximal oxygen uptak e and lactate
threshold yet not show the same performance outcomes. The athlete with better
econom y would be able to race at a higher target pace or power for the same
amount of energy consumption, likely resulting in a better performance,  even
though the two athletes ha ve the same  V̇O2max and lactate thr eshold (23).
Every athlete needs a basic level of aerobic endur ance—i f not for
performance, for health reasons—that can be achiev ed using a wide
variety of training modal ities and programs (see chapter 21 for more
information). Apart from the stereotypical submaximal aerobic
training methods, another method that can produce significant gains
in aerobic fitness (e.g., increased V̇O2max, lactate threshold) is
interv al training (16, 42, 92).
One of the most measur ed adaptations to aerobic endur ance
training is an increase in maximal oxygen uptak e associated with an
increase in maximal cardiac output (15, 31, 65, 161). As the
intensi ty of exercise increases, oxygen consumption rises to maximal
levels. When oxygen consum ption can no longer increase to meet
the demands, maximal oxygen uptak e has been achiev ed even in
the presence of continuing oxygen availability. Aerobic endur ance
training can improve an athlete’ s aerobic power by 5% to 30%,
depending, in part, on the starting fitness level as well as the genetic
potential of the individual (5). Most adaptations in maximal oxygen
consumption can be achiev ed within a 6- to 12-month training
period. After that, further changes in aerobic endur ance
performance consist of increases in exercise economy  and
increased lactate threshold (75). Metabol ic changes include
increased respiratory capaci ty, lower blood lactate concentr ations at
a given submaximal exercise intensi ty, increased mitochondrial and
357
capillary densities, and improved enzyme activity. It may be that
experienced athletes do not experience further increases in their
V̇O2max through chronic aerobic endur ance training but that their
performance impr oves due to enhanced ex ercise econom y (15, 66).
The intensi ty of training is one of the most important factors in
improving and maintaining aerobic power . Short, high-intensi ty bouts
of interval sprints can improve maximal oxygen uptak e if the interim
rest period is also short. A repeated sprint-sequence interval
session  can generally be defined as at least two short bouts of ≥10
seconds with a short recovery period of ≤60 seconds; howev er, this
will depend on the athletes’ goals (50). Callister and colleagues (20)
demonstr ated that long rest periods used with sprints improve sprint
speed without significant increases in maximal aerobic power .
Therefore, longer training sessions with higher amounts of rest
between exercise bouts result in less improvement in aerobic
capaci ty. The use of shorter recovery periods between high-intensi ty
training interv als has been shown in various studies to improve
various skeletal muscle metabol ic processes, resulting in improved
aerobic endur ance perf ormance (48).
Aerobic endur ance training is gener ally associated with alterations
in body composi tion, assuming appropriate nutritional intake.
Aerobic endur ance training usually decreases the relative percentage
of body fat but has little or no significant effect on fat-free mass.
Longer -term programs can result in greater decreases in the
percentage of body fat (15, 34, 73). Excessiv e training may lead to a
predominance of catabol ic activity in the body and cause an
imbalance between catabol ic and anabol ic processes (141).
Aerobic endurance training results in reduced body fat,
increased maximal oxygen uptake, increased exercise
economy, increased respiratory capacity, lower blood
lactate concentrations at submaximal exercise,
increased mitochondrial and capillary densities, and
improved enzyme activity.
358
Table 6.2 lists the physiological changes that occur with short-
term (three- to six-month) aerobic endur ance training and compar es
the results for previously untrained and elite aerobic endur ance
athletes.
359
External and Individual Factors
Influencing Adaptations to Aerobic
Endurance Training
A variety of external and individual factors can influenc e both the
acute responses and the chronic adaptations of the cardiovascular
and respiratory systems to exercise. The effects of altitude, heat,
hyperoxic breathing, smoking, vaping, and blood doping  (external
factors), as well as genetic potential (individual factor), are briefly
described in this section.
Altitude
At elevations greater than 3,900 feet (1,189 m), acute physiological
adjustments begin to occur to compensate for the reduced partial
pressure of oxygen in the atmospher e (61). Figure 6.1 presents the
adjustments to altitude hypoxia  that are immediate and longer
term. Two adjustments that occur early in the acclimatization
process are particularly important. First, there is an increase in
pulmonary ventilation (hyperventilation ) at rest and during
exercise. This increase in ventilation is primari ly the result of
increased breathing frequency . With longer stays at high elevation,
howev er, increased tidal volume also contributes to augmented
ventilation. Stabilization of ventilation is dependent on the level of
altitude and the duration at altitude (77). Second, in the early stages
of altitude exposur e, cardiac output at rest and during submaximal
exercise increases, due prima rily to increases in heart rate (61, 108).
Submaximal heart rate and cardiac output can increase 30% to 50%
above sea-lev el values, and stroke volume is constant or slightly
reduced. Increased submaximal cardiac output reflects the need for
increased blood flow at a time when arterial blood oxygen content is
reduced in order to maintain adequate oxygen delivery to the
tissues.
360
TABLE 6.2  Physiological Variables in Aerobic
Endurance Training
VariablePREVIOUSLY
UNTRAINED
SUBJECTSHIGHLY TRAINED OR
ELITE SUBJECTS
Before After Male Female
HEART RATE (BEATS/MIN)
Resting (127 , 135, 59) 76.4 57.0 45 51
Maximal (127 , 135, 165) 192.8 190.8 196 193.9
STROKE VOLUME (ML)
Resting (135, 169) 79 76 147 133
Maximal (135, 169, 165) 104 120 187 129.6
CARDIAC OUTPUT (L/MIN)
Resting (135, 169, 149) 5.7 4.4 8.2 6.7
Maximal (135, 169, 165) 20.0 22.8 33.8 23.5
Heart v olume (mL) (127 , 135, 149) 860 895 1104 859
BLOOD PRESSURE (MMHG) (127, 135)
Resting (127 , 135) 131/75 144/78 112/75 115/70
Maximal (127 , 127a, 135) 204/81 201/74 188/77 180/74
PULMONARY VENTILATION (BODY TEMPERATURE [37 °C] AND PRESSURE
[AMBIENT], SATURATED [47 MMHG]) (L/MIN)
Resting (127 , 135) 10.9 12.0 11.8 —
Maximal (56a, 127 , 135) 128.7 156.4 164.4 120
ARTERIOVENOUS OXYGEN
DIFFERENCE (ML/100 ML)
Resting (165) 5.8 7.5 — —
Maximal (135, 169, 165) 16.2 17.1 15.9 17.6
*Data ar e not f rom a tr aining study; subjects wer e untr ained or “good distance runners. ”
Data compi led by Carwyn Sharp and K ate Baldwin.
361
Maximal o xygen uptak e (mL · kg−1
· min−1) (127 , 135, 18, 74)36.0 48.0 90.6 72.8
% type I fibers (3, 24 , 59) 48 51 60.8 60.4-61.8
FIBER AREA ( μM2)
Type I (35) 4,947* 6,284* 6,485 6,069
Type II (35) 5,460* 6,378* 8,342 5,642
CAPILLARY DENSITY
Number/mm2 (3, 63) 289 356 640 —
Number/fiber (3) 1.39 1.95 2.15 —
SKELETAL MUSCLE ENZYMES
Citrate synthase ( μmol · min−1·
g−1 wet weight) (162)35.9 45.1 — —
Lactate deh ydrogenase ( μmol · g−1
· min−1) (35, 24)843* 788* 746 744
Succinate deh ydrogenase ( μmol ·
g−1 · min−1) (35)6.4* 17.7* 21.6 10.0
Phosphof ructokinase ( μmol · g−1 ·
min−1) (52, 53)27.13 58.82 20.1 —
MAXIMAL FIBER SHORTENING VELOCITY (FIBER LENGTHS)
Type I (61, 157) 0.99 1.27 1.65 —
Type II (61, 157) 3.18 3.38 3.72 —
*Data ar e not f rom a tr aining study; subjects wer e untr ained or “good distance runners. ”
Data compi led by Carwyn Sharp and K ate Baldwin.
Within 10 to 14 days at a given altitude, heart rate and cardiac
output begin to return to normal values because of the longer -term
acclimatization  response of increased red blood cell production.
Thus, with acute exposur e to altitude, hyperv entilation and
increased submaximal cardiac output are rapid and relatively
effective responses to offset the challenges of the reduced partial
362
pressure of oxygen. Howev er, despite these adjustments, during this
acute period, arterial oxygen saturation decreases and results in
decreases in maximal oxygen uptak e and aerobic performance at
altitudes above 3,900 feet (1,189 m). Acclimatization changes revert
in about one month after return to sea level. As indicated in figure
6.1, chronic physiological and metabol ic adjustments that occur
during a pr olonged al titude exposur e include
increased formation of hemoglobin (gener ally 5%-15%
increase, although higher values have been reported) and red
blood cel ls (30%-50% incr ease),
increased diffusing capaci ty of oxygen through the pulmonary
membr anes,
maintenance of the acid–base balance of body fluids by renal
excretion of HCO 3− and thr ough h yperv entilation, and
increased capi llarization.
All these adaptations gener ally improve tolerance of the relative
hypoxia at medium and high altitudes (58, 61, 108) and may result
in nearly sea-le vel exercise capaci ties with adequate acclimatization.
A minim um of three to six weeks is needed to adapt at moder ate
altitude (2,200  to 3,000 ft [608 to 914 m]). Howev er, reduced
performance, compar ed to sea level, is gener ally expected with
altitude exposur e regardless of the period of acclimatization.
Strength and condi tioning professionals are encour aged to inform
athletes of both expected acute responses and chronic adaptations
to altitude so that they can maintain appropriately adjusted training
regimens and a posi tive mental appr oach to the impact of al titude.
363
FIGURE 6.1  A summary of the immediate and long-term adjustments to al titude h ypoxia.
Heat Acclimatization
The physiologic responses to aerobic exercise depend on the
environmental condi tions in which an athlete is exercising.
Consequently , high environmental temper atures and humidi ty cause
significant alterations to heart rate, oxygen uptak e, minute
ventilation, and blood lactate responses and, ultimately , performance
due to interactions between the environmental condi tions and an
athlete’ s therm oregulatory systems (117). If these environmental
condi tions are hot and dry or warm/hot and humid and produce a
sufficient level of heat stress, performance can be impair ed due to a
cascade of thermor egulator y responses including an increase in
sweat rate and blood flow to the skin to facilitate greater heat
transfer to the environment.  Such a process is in competi tion with
increasing skeletal muscle blood flow to meet the metabol ic
demands of active muscle (54) and thus restrains blood flow
364
availability for oxygen and nutrient delivery and metabol ic by-
product removal in exercising muscle. If this process continues long
enough without sufficient fluid intake, dehydration can result, further
compounding the issue and putting the athlete under greater
physiological and thermor egulatory stress, leading to further
compr omised performance (54). Howev er, repeated exposur e over a
long period of time (often referred to as natural exposu re) to a hot
environment can result in thermor egulatory and physiological
adaptations referred to as heat acclimatization , which can
improve an athlete’ s heat tolerance (10). An athlete can undertak e
heat acclimation  protocols (often referred to as artificial exposur e)
to expose the body to such hot environments, thereby raising core
and skin temper atures and increase sweating to elicit the same
adaptations (124).
The body under goes a number of well-known chronic
thermor egulatory and physiological changes during the heat
acclimatization process. These adaptations include an earlier onset
of sweating in conjunction with an increase in sweat  rate and
evaporative cooling, a reduction in resting and exercising skin and
core body temper ature, an expansion in plasma volume and hence
an increase in blood volume, a reduction in resting and exercising
heart rate, and a reduction in gastrointestinal distress (49). A
summary of the adaptations to thermor egulatory and performance
physiology following aerobic exercise in the heat are outlined in
figure 6.2.
365
FIGURE 6.2 A summ ary of the adaptations to thermor egulatory and performance
physiology f ollowing aer obic ex ercise in the heat.
Reprinted from O.R. Gibson, C.A. Mee, J.A. Willmott, et al., “Heat Alleviation Strategies for Athletic Performance: A
Review and Practitioner Guidelines,” Temperature 7, no. 1 (2019): 3-36. © 2019 The Authors. Published by Informa
UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group. Distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
The benefit of these physiological adaptations is that the athlete
not only has an improved heat tolerance ability via an improved
thermor egulatory system, but such adaptations have also been
found to improve time-trial performance (57, 99) and improve
maximal oxygen uptak e and power output at lactate threshold (99).
Additional ly, the athlete’ s perception of effort and level of thermal
comfort have also been found to be improved following heat
acclimation (49). Howev er, in a review by Rahimi and colleagues
(130) of the physiological responses to heat acclimation  across 11
randomiz ed controlled trials with 215 participants, it was reported
that heat acclimation was effective for improving time-trial
366
performance as well as reducing time-trial heart rate and maximal
heart rate, despite there being no beneficial effect on maximal
oxygen uptak e, core or mean skin temper ature, plasma volume, or
blood lactate, nor meaningf ul effects on rating of perceived exertion
or thermal comfort. The differences between studies and whether
improvements were observ ed with respect to heat acclimation may
be related to the environmental condi tions (i.e., warm or hot, dry or
humid), intensi ty of the exercise used, the acclimation protocols that
the athletes were exposed  to, and the initial level of athlete
acclimation, all of which determine the degree of thermor egulatory
and ph ysiological adaptations (124).
Heat acclimation adaptations start to occur quickly once exposed
to the hot environment and continue for the duration of the process.
Howev er, it needs to be noted that heat acclimation adaptations do
not all occur at the same rate, with some occurring more quickly
than others and some (e.g., sweat rate) continuin g as the
acclimation period continues (124). The time course of the
physiological adaptations to heat acclimation are outlined in figure
6.3. The physiological changes to the thermor egulatory system start
to occur very quickly , commencing from the first day of exposur e
(124) and continuing over subsequent days, with the majori ty of the
adaptations (~75%) reported to occur within the first four to six
days (121).
Unfortunately , heat acclimation–induced thermor egulatory and
physiological adaptations are transient and relatively short-term, and
after leaving the hot environment the changes start to dissipate after
only a few days or weeks depending on the length of the exposur e
(47). While a lot is known  about the heat acclimation process,
consider ably less is known about the decay rate of the adaptations
(49). Original ly, it was proposed that for each day of a heat
acclimation protocol, the adaptation would be retained for two days
(96). Howev er, more recent resear ch indicates that for every day
that passes without exposur e to the heat, there is a 2.5% loss of
adaptations (28). The adaptations also decay at different rates and
367
coincide with the rate of adaptation; that is, those that adapted
quickly also decay quickly (122). Typical ly, full heat acclimation
adaptations are expected to be lost after a month if there is no
repeated exercise heat stress (128). It also appears that the loss of
adaptations may be affected  by the level of exercise undertak en
after heat acclimation. Consequently , it is recomme nded that
athletes mainta in their training in the days after heat acclimation to
assist retaining their thermor egulatory and physiological adaptations
(128).
It has also been reported that the heat acclimation adaptations
may remain longer for those athletes acclimatiz ed in dry, hot
environments compar ed to humid, hot environments (121).
Unfortunately , little resear ch has been conducted on the
transferability of adaptations between different hot environments
(e.g., hot and dry to warm and humid). Howev er, in one of the few
studies to investigate this aspect of heat acclimation, it was found
that cross-adaptation from one environment to the other is
achiev able (56), an important point worth noting for athletes who
train and compete in di fferent hot en vironments.
368
FIGURE 6.3  The time course of the ph ysiological adaptations to heat ac climation.
Reprinted by permission from J.D. Périard, S. Racinais, and M.N. Sawka, “Adaptations and Mechanisms of Human Heat
Acclimation: Applications for Competitive Athletes and Sports,” Scandinavian Journal of Medicine & Science in Sports,
25 (2015).
Two other factors to consider with respect to heat acclimation are
the influence of the level of aerobic fitness and biological sex. There
is evidence to suggest that athletes who have a higher level of
aerobic fitness have a greater ability to exercise in the heat due to
the ability to tolerate higher core body temper atures (124) and may
also better retain their heat acclimation adaptations (121). With
respect to sex, differences are observ ed in the physiological
responses to exercise in the heat between males and females.
Females have been found to experience greater increases in body
temper ature in the heat due to a lower total body sweat response
when compar ed to males (43). This difference in sweat rate is
attributed to a smaller increase in sweat rate for a given increase in
body temper ature (i.e., lower thermosensi tivity) (43). It has also
been observ ed that while both females and males respond to short-
term heat acclimation protocols, females may require a slightly
longer protocol to establ ish thermor egulatory and cardiovascular
stability (111).
369
With this information in mind, strength and conditioning
professionals need to consider the type of heat acclimatio n protocol
that they will emplo y, the proximity of the heat acclimation protocol
to the athlete’ s competi tion, and the training status and sex of the
athlete with whom they are working, in order to maximiz e the
potential benefi ts from the acclimation environment to the
competi tion environment. More information on heat acclimation
protocols and the different types and consider ations when
implementing such pr otocols ar e outl ined in chapter 21 .
Altitude or Heat: Which Training Protocol
Should an Athlete Undertake?
Before answer ing this question, it is important to understand how
the two types of training protocols differ in terms of adaptations.
Heat acclimation training has become popular with aerobic
endur ance athletes, often as an alternativ e to altitude training due to
less expense and easier access to hot versus altitude training
environments. While evidence suggests that heat acclimation can
improve maximal oxygen uptak e in thermoneutral  (164) and hot
environments (99, 163) as well as performance in thermoneutr al
(112) and hot environments (57, 99), the changes are not due to the
same physiological mechanisms brought about by altitude training
(hypoxic exposur e).
Training at altitude causes exposur e to a hypobaric -hypoxic
environment and a reduction  in an athlete’ s arterial oxygen content,
which sets off a sequence of events starting with an increase in the
amount of hypoxia-inducible factor and the subsequent expression
of the genes associated with the transcription of erythropoietin
(EPO)  and nitric oxide (6). The increased concentr ations of EPO
bring about changes in red cell volume and hemoglobin mass, which
increase the oxygen-carrying capaci ty of the blood as well as
increase the arterio venous oxygen difference, which can provide an
improvement in maximal aerobic capaci ty and subsequent aerobic
endur ance performance (6). In comparison, heat acclimation training
370