# Chapter 7: Age-Related Differences and Their Implications for Resistance Training

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

**PDF Pages:** 384--437

CHAPTER  7
AGE-RELATED DIFFERENCES
AND THEIR IMPLICATIONS
FOR RESISTANCE TRAINING
Rhodri S. Lloyd, PhD, Sylvia Moeskops, PhD, and
Avery D. Faigenbaum, EdD
After completing this chapter, you will be able to
understand the meri ts of adopting a long-term appr oach to the
development of athleticism f or chi ld and adolescent
populations;
evaluate the evidence r egarding the saf ety, effectiveness, and
importance of r esistance ex ercise for youth populations;
describe the ef fects of aging on musculosk eletal heal th and
performance;
explor e the tr ainabi lity of older adul ts and the benefi ts of
exercise, including r esistance tr aining in aging populations; and
explain wh y adaptations to r esistance ex ercise v ary gr eatly
among these distinct populations.
Resistance exercise has been proven to be a safe and effective
method of condi tioning for individuals with various needs, goals, and
abilities. Resistance training is also recogniz ed as a fundamental
384
component of long-term athletic development that helps to support
lifelong participation in sport and recreational physical activity from
childhood to the more senior  years of life (137). In light of its many
benefi ts for all individuals, resistance exercise for youth (137) and
older people (76) has received increasing public and medical
attention. Howev er, when designing and evaluating resistance
training programs, strength and condi tioning professionals need to
understand the implications of age-related differences in body
composi tion, muscular performance, trainabi lity, and injury risk to
facilitate individual ized ex ercise pr escription.
For the purposes of this chapter, resistance exercise  is defined
as a special ized method of condi tioning whereby an individual is
working against a wide range of resistiv e loads to enhance health,
fitness, and performance. This term should be distinguished from
the sport of weightlifting, in which individuals attempt to lift maximal
amounts of weight in compe tition, specifically in the clean and jerk
and snatch exercises. The term childhood  refers to a period of life
before the development of secondary sex characteristics (e.g., pubic
hair and reproductiv e organs), and the term adolescence  refers to
the period between childhood and adulthood . For ease of
discussion, the term youth  or young athlet e refers to both
children and adolescents. The terms older  and senior  include men
and women over 65 years of age. Athleticism  reflects the ability to
repeatedly execute a variety of movements with precision and
confidence in a range of environments, which require appropriate
levels of motor skill compe tency, balance, coordination, strength,
power , speed, agility, and endur ance (137). The development of
athleticism is important for everyone and should not be reserv ed as
an outcome goal only f or those in volved in or ganized sport.
385
Youth Populations
The National Strength and Condi tioning Association considers long-
term athletic development  as the development of athleticism
over time, with an aim to enhance physical fitness, reduce injury
risk, and improve mental and physical health and well-being (137).
The concept of regularly participating in activities that enhance
athleticism is relevant for people of all ages. Howev er, over the past
two decades, there has been a growing focus on long-te rm athletic
development programs, particularly for youth populations (137).
Athletic development models that encompass multiple modes of
training have been proposed previously in the literature. For
example, Lloyd and Oliver (141) proposed the youth physical
development (YPD) model, which provides training guidel ines for
males and females (figure 7.1a and 7.1b). The YPD model is based
on the notion that all comp onents of fitness are trainable at all
stages of development, and therefore training programs should be
multifaceted in nature to develop multiple dimensions of athleticism.
Crucial ly, the model promotes a consistent focus on the
simultaneous development of muscle strength and motor skill
competency , which provide the foundations for overall athleticism
(137). The model also suppo rts children engaging in some form of
physical activity and preparatory condi tioning early in life to take
advantage of the heightened neuroplastici ty associated with early
childhood development (88). Similarly, training prescript ion should
transition from low structur e and movement explor ation early in a
child’s development to a more structur ed and targeted approach as
individuals accumulate training experience and move toward later
stages of dev elopment.
Howev er, several authors have also establ ished more detailed
development models for individual components of fitness, such as
agility (144), speed (176), power (155), and endur ance (104), and
specific modes  of training, such as motor skills (194), resistance
training (91), plyometrics (140), and weightl ifting (168). While each
386
model focuses on bespok e elements of athletic development, several
notable commonal ities exist between models: (a) Children should be
exposed to a wide range of training activities that target motor skill
development and muscular strength, (b) training should begin simple
and become more advanced as children progress through the
various stages of developmen t, and (c) training should be generic to
start with and then become more special ized over time as workloads
and tr aining exposur e incr ease.
Collectively, strength and condi tioning programs effectively
promote the development of athleticism in both children and
adolescents (141). In particular , leading international consensus (17,
137, 139, 215) and seminal meta- analytical data (132, 134) have
indicated the effectiveness of resistance training in enhancing
multiple components of fitness in youth populations. While the
effectiveness of resistance training in youth is unequiv ocal, it is
important for strength and conditioning professionals to understand
how the fundamental principles of growth, matur ation, and
development can affect training adaptations, confound interpretation
of testing or monitoring data, and can influence the development
and evaluation of safe and effective resistance training programs.
Because youth sports training has become more intense and
complex (21), anatomical, physiological, and psychosocial factors
that may be associated with acute and chronic injury also need to be
consider ed.
The Growing Child
In this section, the terms growth , development , and maturation
are used to describe changes that occur in the body throughout life.
The term growth refers to an increase in body size or a particular
body part; development  describes the natural progression from
prenatal life to adulthood; and matur ation is defined as progress
toward a fully matur e state, which varies in timing, tempo , and
magni tude between different bodily systems (142). Puberty  refers
to a period of time in which secondary sex characteristics develop
387
and a child transitions to young adulthood. During pubert y, changes
also occur in body composi tion and the performance of physical
skills, with such changes v arying mark edly between individuals.
388
389
FIGURE 7.1 The youth physical development model for (a) males and (b) females. Font
size refers to importance; light blue and light red boxes refer to preadolescent periods of
adaptation; dark blue and dark red boxes refer to adolescent periods of adaptation. FMS:
fundamental movement skills; MC: metabol ic condi tioning; PHV: peak height velocity; SSS:
sport-speci fic ski lls; YPD: y outh ph ysical dev elopment.
Adapted by permission from R.S. Lloyd and J.L. Oliver, “The Youth Physical Development Model: A New Approach to
Long-Term Athletic Development,” Strength and Conditioning Journal 34, no. 3 (2012): 61-72.
Chronological Age Versus Biological Maturation
Because of consider able variation in the rates of growth and
development, it is not particularly accurate to define a stage of
matur ation or development by age in months or years, which is
known as chronological age. Children do not grow at a constant
rate, and there are substantial interindividual differences in physical
development at any given chronological age. For example, a group
of 14-year-old children can have a height difference as great as 9
inches (23 cm) and a weight difference up to 40 pounds (18 kg),
while an 11-year-old girl may be taller and more physically skilled
than an 11-year-old boy. These differences correspond to variations
in the timing, tempo , and magni tude of matur ation (142). The onset
of puberty can vary from 8 to 13 years in girls and from 9 to 15
years in boys, with girls beginning pubert y approximately two years
before boys.
Given the limitations associated with chronological age,
development can be better assessed by biological maturation ,
which can be measur ed in terms of skeletal age, sexual maturation,
or somatic (physique) matur ation. The assessment of matur ation in
children is important for several reasons. Maturi ty assessment can
be used to evaluate growth and development patterns in children. In
addition, since the degree of matur ation is related to measur es of
fitness, including muscular strength and motor skill performance
(120), techniques used to assess matur ation can help ensur e that
children are more fairly matched for fitness testing and athletic
competi tion, as opposed to being grouped according to chronological
age. In adequately nourished  children there is no scienti fic evidence
390
that physical training delays or accelerates growth or matur ation in
boys and girls (70). Further , the osteogenic benefi ts of physical
activity, specifically weight -bearing activities that gener ate
compr essive forces, are essential for skeletal remodel ing and growth
(228).
The gold standar d for determining biological matur ation is skeletal
age assessment. This technique involves trained radiographers
comparing X-rays or radiogr aphs of a child against standar d
reference radiographs to determine the extent of ossification of the
bones of the left wrist (93, 201, 217-219). Ossification  refers to the
process of laying down new bone material by cells called
osteoblasts . While skeletal age provides the most accurate and
reliable form of assessing maturi ty, concerns with cost, special ist
equipment, time constr aints, and the need for specific radiogr aphic
expertise make the method unrealistic for most practitioners working
with youth. Furthermor e, strength and condi tioning professionals are
not qualified to determine sexual age as an indicator of matur ation,
given the in vasive natur e of this assessment.
For most practitioners, the most realistic and feasible means of
estimating biological age is from somatic assessments (142).
Somatic age reflects the degree of growth in overall statur e or
smaller subdimensions of the body (e.g., limb length). Measur es of
growth (e.g., standing height and seated height) are relatively easy
to collect, are nonin vasive, and require minimal equipment.
Techniques available to the practitioner include longitudinal growth
curve analysis, percentages and predictions of final adult height
(125), and the prediction of age from peak height velocity (PHV )
(158), which is defined as the age at maximum rate of growth
during the pubertal growth spurt (59) with the mean age, on
average, being around 13.8 years in boys and 11.9 year in girls (10).
While the percentage of predicted adult height (125) and the
maturi ty offset (158) have both been used to assign youth into
maturi ty categories, longitudinal data indicate that the percentage of
predicted adult height might be more accurate at predicting
391
observ ed age at PHV (184); this appears to be a valid alternativ e for
classifying maturity status when compar ed to longitudinal growth
curve analysis (166). Using age, height, weight, and mid-par ental
height, a child’s eventual adult height can be estimated, and their
current height can then be determined as a percentage of predicted
adult height (125). For example, a 13-year-old boy who is 165
centimeters (5 ft 5 in) tall, 60 kilograms (132 lb) in weight and
whose mother  and father are 160 centimeters (5 ft 3 in) and 185
centimeters (6 ft 1 in), respectiv ely, would be estimated at
approximately 90% of their predicted adult height. In some cases, it
may be appropriate to measur e somatic growth every three months
(142). More frequent measu res could be taken to create a rolling
average and a smoother growth curve; howev er, this is not always
feasible. For most settings, taking measur ements every three
months is likely more practical. This interv al should be long enough
to prevent practitioners from misinterpr eting small growth changes
caused by measur ement inconsistencies. Howev er, as a child nears
their peak height velocity (PHV), it may be wise for practitioners to
measur e more frequently , such as monthly . This increased frequency
is due to the rapid growth rate associated with this developmental
stage.
The adolescent growth spurt ensues approximately 88% to 95%
of predicted adult height, and longitudinal data indicate that PHV
occurs at approximately 91% to 92% of predicted adult height
(216). The risk of injury can be elevated in individuals who are
around the time of PHV, and especial ly those who are also
experiencing high rates of growth during this period (116, 165).
Therefore, in the earlier example of the 13-year-old, his or her
training program might need to be modified (and potential ly more
frequent measur es of height taken) as the child approaches PHV in
the event of disrupted coordination and control and heightened
injury risk. Alterations in center of mass, muscle imbalances, and the
relative tightening of the muscle–tendon units spanning rapidly
growing bones are potential risk factors for overuse injuries during
392
the pubertal growth spurt (170, 225). Strength and condi tioning
professionals may need to adjust training programs (e.g., reinforce
high-qual ity movement patterns, target flexibi lity restrictions, correct
muscle imbalan ces, or decrease the volume or intensi ty [or both] of
training) during these periods of rapid growth. If a young athlete
complains of pain or discomf ort during a growth spurt, the strength
and condi tioning professional should also consider the possibi lity of
an overuse injury rather than labeling these complaints “growing
pains” and, in consul tation with the child’s parents or guardians,
should r efer the chi ld to a medical pr actitioner .
Notwi thstanding the influence of growth and matur ation,  training
programs should be tailored to accommodate individual differences
in ability and previous training experience, particularly when
prescribing exercise for children in the weight room. It might be
suitable for an early-maturing, experienced, and technical ly
competent 13-year-old girl to be exposed to more advanced forms of
training, whereas a late-maturing 16-year-old boy with no training
history and low levels of technical competency may not be ready for
the demands of heavy resistance exercise and require more
introductory training approaches. Therefore, while a given training
program will have an intended adaptation (e.g., strength and power
development), a child’s technical competency  (i.e., how well they
move) in addition to their training age (i.e., the length of time the
child has consistently followed a formal ized and supervised
resistance training program) and their resistance training skill literacy
(i.e., how children think, connect, and feel about resistance training)
should be key consider ations in order to develop appropriate training
programs (61, 137, 142). Strength and condi tioning professionals
must recogniz e all these variables and should individual ize training
program design based on each child’s technical competency , training
age, and maturi ty level. When creating any youth resistance training
program, strength and condi tioning professionals should  also take
into consider ation the unique psychosocial needs of each individual
child and then design, implem ent, and revise programs according to
393
these needs. For example, a strength and condi tioning professional
will typical ly need to use different interpersonal skills to coach an
inexperienced child with low technical competency and low levels of
self-confidence, versus an experienced and highly competent
adolescent who simply lacks motiv ation.
Two children of the same chronological age can differ
biologically by up to five years, which underlines the
importance of accounting  for maturation in the design
of individualized training programs.
Muscle and Bone Growth
As children grow, muscle mass steadi ly increases. At birth,
approximately 25% of a child’s body weight is muscle mass, and by
adulthood this percentage increases to about 40% (146). During
pubert y, marked increases in hormonal concentr ations (e.g.,
testoster one, growth hormone, and insulin-like growth factor) in
boys result in a discernible increase in muscle mass and widening of
the shoulders, whereas in girls an increase in estrogen production
causes increased body fat deposi tion, breast development, and
widening of the hips (59). Although muscle mass in girls continues
to increase during adolescence, the increase occurs at a lower rate
than in boys due to differences in their hormonal profiles (146).
Throughout this time, the increase in muscle mass in both sexes is
due to the hypertr ophy of individual muscle fibers rather than
hyperplasia (146). Peak muscle mass occurs between the ages of 16
and 20 years in females and between 18 and 25 years in males
unless af fected b y exercise, diet, or both (146).
394
FIGURE 7.2  Bone formation, which tak es place as a r esult of gr owth and dev elopment.
Most bone formation occurs in the diaphysis  (primary
ossification center), which is the central shaft of a long bone, and in
the growth carti lage (secondary ossification center), which is
located at three sites in the child: the epiph yseal (growth)  plate, the
joint surface, and the apophyseal  insertions of muscle–tendon
units. When the epiph yseal plate becomes completely ossified, the
long bones stop growing (figure 7.2). Although bones typical ly begin
to fuse during early adolescence, girls gener ally achiev e full bone
maturi ty about  two to three years before boys. The actual age varies
consider ably, but most bones ar e fused b y the early 20s.
A particular concern in children is the vulner ability of the growth
cartilage to trauma and overuse (106). Injuries to the growth
cartilage may disrupt the bone’ s blood and nutrient supply and result
in permanent growth disturbances (e.g., skeletal undergrowth,
skeletal overgrowth, or malal ignment of bone). Trauma from falls or
excessiv e repetitive stress that may result in a ligament tear in an
adult may produce an epiphyseal plate fracture in a child. Because
the peak incidence of epiph yseal plate fractures in children occurs at
around the time of PHV, it seems that a preadolescent child may be
395
at less risk for an epiph yseal plate fracture than an adolescent child
experiencing the growth spurt (156). It has been suggested that the
epiph yseal plates of younger children may be stronger and more
resistant to shearing-t ype forces, which may be the cause of injuries
to the gr owth carti lage (156).
Growth cartilage in children is located at the epiphyseal
plate, the joint surface, and the apophyseal inser tions.
Damage to the growth cartilage may impair the growth
and development of the affected bone. However, the
risk of such damage can be reduced with appropriate
exercise technique, sensible progression of training
loads, and suitable instruction by qualified strengt h and
conditioning professionals.
Developmental Changes in Muscular Strength
As muscle mass increases throughout preadolescence and
adolescence, so does muscular strength. In fact, the growth curves
for strength are similar to those for body mass (59). In boys, peak
gains in strength typical ly occur about 1.2 years after PHV and 0.8
years after peak weight velocity, with body weight being the clearer
indicator (146) . This reflects the adage that children “stretch out
before they fill out”; that is, they experience growth in height before
gaining muscle  mass. This pattern also suggests that during periods
of rapid growth, muscle increases first in mass and later in its ability
to express and attenuate high levels of force. This is reflected by
meta- analytical data that show adolescents were able to attain
increases in absolute muscular strength that were nearly 50%
greater than children (15). In girls, peak gains in strength also
typical ly occur after PHV, although there is more individual variation
in the relationship of strength to height and body weight for girls
than for boys (146). Although the strength of boys and girls is
essential ly equal during preadolescence, hormonal differences during
pubert y are responsible for acceleration in the strength gains of boys
396
and a gener al plateau in the natural strength development of girls
during adolesc ence (139, 146). On average, peak strength is usually
attained by age 20 in untrained women and between the ages of 20
and 30 in untr ained men (146).
An important factor related to the expression of muscular strength
in children is the development of the nervous system. If myelination
of nerve fibers (motor neurons) is absent or incomplete, fast
reactions and skilled movements cannot be successfully performed,
and high levels of strength  and power are impossible. As the
nervous system continues to develop with age, children improve
their performance in skills that require coordination, balance, agility,
speed, strength, and power . Since the myelination of many motor
neurons is incomplete until sexual matur ation, children should not be
expected to respond to training in the same way or to reach the
same skill level as adults until they reach full neural maturi ty (127).
Howev er, children are well placed for skill development given the
heightened neuroplastici ty associated with childhood. This stage of
development involves the process of pruning and strengthening of
the synaptic pathways (88), which, with the appropriate
environment and activities, enable children to refine motor control
strategies and enhance skill acquisi tion. International consensus
proposes that all youth should be exposed to training programs that
provide an opportuni ty to develop a broad range of fitness
components to build well-rounded youth (17, 137). Howev er, given
that childhood is a time when the corticospinal tissue is plastic, and
that neuromuscular coordination and force production are governed
by neural activation and control, children should primari ly focus on
the development of motor skill competency and muscular strength
because these qualities will serve as foundations of athleticism and a
lifetime of moder ate to vigorous physical activity (137). Crucial ly,
coordination and muscular strength should not be viewed as distinct
qualities but as syner gistic components of motor skill performance
(30). Therefore, practitioners should seek to train these qualities
397
concomi tantly instead of developing them in a hierarchical,
sequential manner .
Because physiological functions are more closely related to
biological age than to chronological age, at any given time an early-
maturing child will likely have an advantage in measur es of
athleticism (e.g., absolute strength) if compar ed against a later-
maturing child of the same sex with less muscle mass. Clearly ,
physical differences in body proportions can affect the execution of
resistance exercises. For example, short arms and a large chest
cavity offer a biomechanical advantage in upper body pressing
exercises, whereas conversely , long legs and a long torso are a
disadv antage in squat ting movements. These anthropom etric factors
have implications for strength and condi tioning professionals who
are attempting  to standar dize fitness tests or develop a resistance
training program for a group of boys and girls who vary greatly in
physical size. It should be noted that whether in a testing or training
environment, the practitioner should use child-size resistance
machines or exercises using body weight, medicine balls, elastic
bands, dumbbel ls, or barbel ls. In situations where practitioners are
coaching groups of young athletes, they typical ly will need to
account for variation in technical competency , maturi ty status, and
training experie nce to provide a training session that is individual ized
wherever possible. When coaching large groups of children with low
coach-to- athlete ratios, individual izing one or two additional
exercises per session (based on results from simple field-based
testing) might appropriately account for individual ization. Similarly,
training sessions that pursue a common goal (i.e., movement skill
development and muscular strength) but adopt differentiating levels
(e.g., technical difficulty, intensity, range of motion, movement
speed) can also enable practitioners to individual ize training based
on the athletes’ abi lity.
The reasons for individual ized training programs should be
explained to all participants, and special encour agement should be
offered to late matur ers who may be smaller and weaker than
398
chronological- age peers with more advanced biological maturi ty.
Although late matur ers tend to eventual ly catch up to the early
matur ers as they proceed through adolescence, young athletes
should realize that many factors, including motiv ation, coaching, and
innate ability, contribute to success in sport. Importantly , when
coaching youth populations, especial ly young children (e.g., 5-7
years of age), training environments should attempt to foster task-
oriented views of success (e.g., application of effort, learning
something new) rather than an ego-oriented view (e.g., simply
winning or beating others). While not an exhaustiv e list, previous
literature has noted that athletic development programs should seek
to cultivate a growth mindset , self-determined motiv ation, perceived
competence, confidence, and resilience as key psychological
attributes in y oung athletes (175).
Youth Resistance Training
Clinicians, coaches, and exercise scientists now agree that resistance
exercise is a safe and effective method of condi tioning for children
(13, 56, 65, 71, 127, 139, 215). An increasing number of boys and
girls are participating in resistance training activities, and major
sports medicine organizations support children’s participation in a
range of resistance exercise modes, provided that the programs are
appropriately designed and supervised by qualified professionals (21,
56, 139, 215). National standar ds and grade-lev el outcomes for
physical education include guidel ines and recommendations that
recogniz e the importance of fitness activities that enhance muscle
and bone strength (52). Perhaps most notably , the World Health
Organization stipulates that children should engage in muscle- and
bone-str engthening activities three times per week as part of their
physical activi ty recommendations (235).
It is imper ative that strength and condi tioning professionals
remember that children are not miniatur e adults. No matter how big
or strong a child is, children are physical ly, psychological ly, and
social ly less matur e and are often experiencing training activities for
399
the very first time. Children should begin resistance training at a
level that is commensur ate with their physical and technical abilities,
maturi ty level, and individual goals (141). Adult programs and
training philosophies should not be superimposed on younger
populations. In such instance s, the intensi ty and volume of training
are often too severe, and the recovery between training sessions is
inadequate to enable training adaptation to take place. When
introducing children to resistance training activities, it is always
better to under estimate their physical abilities and gradual ly increase
the volume and intensi ty of training than to exceed their abilities and
risk injury or long-term negativ e heal th outcomes.
Responsiveness to Resistance Training in Children
A pletho ra of resear ch now shows both children and adolescents can
make meaning ful improvements in a wide range of athletic qualities
in response to different modes of resistance training (59, 141). Much
of the early controversy surrounding youth resistance training
stemmed from the issue of children’s trainabi lity (i.e., children’s
responsiv eness to the stimulus of resistance exercise) due to early
studies failing to demonstr ate a strength increase in preadolescents
who participated in a resistance training program (49). Although the
lack of significant findings in these studies could be explained by
methodological shortcoming s, such as short study duration or
inadequate training volume or intensi ty, the results from these
reports are sometimes cited as proof that resistance training is
ineffective for children. As previously discussed, muscular strength
normal ly increases from childhood and throughout the teenage
years; thus, a more appropriate conclusion from these reports may
be that training-induced gains from a short-duration, low-volume,
and low-intensi ty training program are not distinguishable from gains
attributable to normal gr owth and matur ation.
Other investigations have clearly demonstr ated that boys and girls
can increase muscular strength above and beyond that
accompan ying growth and matur ation alone, provided that the
400
intensi ty and volume of training are adequate (48, 63, 135, 138,
197). Children as young as age five have benefi ted from
developmental ly appropriate resistance training (3, 121), and a
variety of training modal ities have proven to be effective (139).
While gains in a maximum strength range of approximately 10% to
90% have been reported in the literature (15), strength gains of
roughly 30% to 40% are typical ly observ ed in untrained
preadolescent children following short-term (8-20 weeks) resistance
training programs (56, 139). Howev er, following the initial adaptation
period, the rate of change in strength gains will be attenuated as
youth adapt to the training program, thus highlighting the need for
continued, progressive training. Meta- analytical data have shown
that resistance training interv entions realize larger gains in muscle
strength and power when programs exceed 23 weeks in duration
(134). Longer -term training programs afford more opportuni ties for
children to learn and develop skills but also enable children to be
exposed to higher intensi ties of training in a safe and progressive
manner . Lesinksi and colleagues (134) also indicated that strength
gains were greater when young athletes were exposed  to higher
relative intensi ties (>80% 1RM). Similar notions apply to other
fitness compon ents, with data showing larger gains in jump height in
response to moder ate- to high-intensi ty resistance training (212) and
greater gains in peak oxygen uptak e (V̇O2peak) when endur ance
training is prescribed at ≥85% HRmax (5). Clearly , training intensi ty
is a critical prescription variable for strength and condi tioning
coaches to manipulate; howev er, in accordance with the principle of
progressive overload, any increases in intensi ty should be applied in
a progressive and gradual manner , with periodiz ed fluctuations in
volumes and intensi ties o ver time (59).
It is crucial that practitioners ensure that training
intensity is never increased at the expense of technical
competency or a child’s psychosocial maturity. Programs
should alway s remain designed in accordance with the
401
specific needs, abilitie s, and aspirations of the
individual.
Children who participate in resistance training programs are likely
to undergo periods of reduce d training or inactivi ty due to program
design factors, extended travel plans, busy schedules, injury ,
involvement in multiple sports, or decreased motiv ation. This
tempor ary reduction or withdrawal of the training stimulu s is called
detraining . In children, unlike adults, the evaluation of strength
changes during the detraining phase is compl icated by the growth-
related strength increases during the same period. Nevertheless,
data indicate that training-induced strength gains in children are
impermanent and tend to return to untrained control group values
during the detraining period (55, 69). In one report, participation in
physical education classes and organized sports throughout an eight-
week detraining period did not maintain the preadolescents’ training-
induced strength gains (69). In another study comparing the effects
on children of one and two days per week of resistance training,
participants who resistance trained only once per week averaged
67% of the strength gains of participants who resistance trained
twice per week (63). While increased training frequency is related to
a greater strength training effect in youth (15), this findin g must be
consider ed in light of lifestyle factors (e.g., nutrition and sleep) and
other commi tments that youth or young athletes may have (e.g.,
competi tive playing schedul e, schoolwork, time to interact with
peers). Though the precise mechanisms responsible  for the
detraining response remain unclear , it seems likely that changes in
neuromuscular functioning are at least partly responsibl e. Further ,
the detraining effect may not be homogenous, with different
neuromuscular qualities in young children showing different
responses f ollowing the cessation of a tr aining pr ogram (55, 172).
The potential trainabi lity of children and adolescents is evident
from resear ch studies that have adopted long-term training
interv ention periods. For example, a series of studies examined the
402
effects of a two-year strength training program on strength (123),
speed (208), and change-of -direction speed (124) in youth soccer
players in German y. Using a linear periodiz ed training approach (i.e.,
four weeks of technique block, eight weeks of hypertr ophy emphasis
block, and eight weeks of strength emphasis, all of which repeated
twice), young athletes ranging from 11 to 19 years of age were able
to make substantial increases in squat strength (123), which also
translated to improvements in speed (208) and change-of -direction-
speed (124) perf ormance.
Notwi thstanding the clear benefi ts of resistance training,
combined resistance training (i.e., strength training and plyometrics)
has been shown to be more effective than strength training in
isolation (193) . Previous resear ch has investigated the effects of 28
weeks of combined resistance training versus combined resistance
training with weightl ifting on physical fitness (187) and establ ished
lower limb injury risk factors (188) in adolescent boys. Notably , both
training groups were able to realize improvements in physical fitness
(i.e., strength, power , speed), movement competency (i.e.,
resistance training skills battery quotient), and lower limb jump-
landing mecha nics (i.e., tuck jump assessment) irrespectiv e of
program content; howev er, the percentage improvement in
movement competency was greater when weightl ifting progressions
were included in the combined resistance training program.
Interestingly , the first 14 weeks resulted in significant gains in
movement competency and strength, while the second 14 weeks of
training resulted in small to moder ate improvements in sprint speed
and indices of power , which  reflect the sequence of strength and
movement competency serving as the foundations for gains in power
(12, 99).
The benefit of adopting a long-term approach for the athletic
development of youth can be seen in a study that showed
prepubertal gymnasts were able to make significant improvements in
strength, powe r, speed, and vaulting performance in response to 10
months of neuromuscular training delivered in addition to standar d
403
gymnastics training (160). The study adopted a linear periodiz ed
approach to training with a large proportion of time devoted to
gener al preparatory training . The gains in athleticism reported
exceeded those of both of a gymnastics-only and a non-gymnastics
control group. Interestingly , this study demonstr ated a tempor al
response to training, like the findings of Pichar do and colleagues
(187). Significant improvements were observ ed in different physical
attributes over time. After four months, isometric absolute peak
force and standing broad jump showed notable increases . By seven
months, improvements were seen in countermo vement jump height,
modified reactiv e strength index, and drop jump height.  Finally, at
the 10-month mark, enhancements were noted in peak sprint speed,
spring-l ike behavior, and vaulting vertical takeoff velocity. This study
underscor es the benefi ts of long-term engagement in strength and
condi tioning and that some adaptations take time to material ize,
especial ly in less matur e children.
Changes in muscle hypertr ophy can significantly contribute to
training-induced strength gains in adolescents and adults, yet it is
unlikely that muscle hypertr ophy is primari ly responsible for training-
induced strength gains (at least up to 20 weeks) in preadolescents
(179, 197). Although some findings do not agree with this
suggestion, preadolescents appear to experience more difficulty
increasing their muscle mass through a resistance training program
due to inadeq uate levels of circulating hormones (testoster one,
growth hormone, insulin-like growth factor). In preadolescent boys
and girls, testoster one conce ntration is between 20 and 60 ng/100
mL; in contrast, during adolescence, testoster one levels in males
increase to about 600 ng/100  mL while the levels in females remain
unchanged (146).
It appears that preadolescents have more potential for an
increase in strength owing to neural factors, such as increases in
motor unit activation and synchronization as well as enhanced motor
unit recruitment and firing frequency (90, 105, 139, 179, 197). It
has also been suggested that intrinsic muscle adaptations,
404
improvements in motor skill performance, and the coordination of
the involved muscle groups could be partly responsible for training-
induced strength gains in preadolescents (197). One cannot state
without qualification, howev er, that resistance training  does not
result in muscle hypertr ophy in preadolescents, because it is possible
that longer study durations, higher training volumes, and more
precise measuring techniques (e.g., computeriz ed imaging) may be
needed to uncover potential training-induced muscle hypertr ophy in
youth who are following a resistance training program. Resear chers
have reported novel data showing that prepubertal female gymnasts
significantly improved muscle thickness (as measur ed by 2D
ultrasound) in addition to measur es of isometric peak force and
stretch-shortening cycle function following exposur e to a 10-month
neuromuscular training interv ention (161). While muscle thickness is
not a direct measur e of muscle size or volume, it has been positively
correlated with muscle anatomical cross-sectional area (77). The
data from Moesk ops and colleagues (161) indicate that some change
in muscle architectur e might be possible even in prepubertal children
when they ar e exposed to long-term neur omuscular interv entions.
During and after pubert y, training-induced gains in strength are
typical ly associated with gains in muscle hypertr ophy and
architectur e (85, 195) due to hormonal influences and ongoing
neural adaptations (86). Although lower levels of testoster one in
adolescent females limit the magni tude of training-induced increases
in muscle hypertr ophy, other hormone and growth factors (e.g.,
growth hormone and insulin-like growth factor) may be at least
partly responsible for their muscle development. Figure 7.3 highlights
the factors that contribute to the development of muscular strength
—namely , fat-free mass, testoster one concentr ations , nervous
system development, and the differentiation of fast-twitch and slow-
twitch muscle fibers.
Preadolescent boys and girls can significantly improve
their strength above and beyond growth and maturation
405
with resistance training. Neurological factors , as
opposed to hypertrophic factors, are primarily
responsible for these gains.
In addition to increasing muscular strength, muscular power , and
muscular endurance, regula r participation in a youth resistance
training program has the potential to influence many other health-
and fitness-r elated measur es (84, 132, 139). Resistanc e exercise
may favorably alter selected anatomic structur es (128, 223),
psychosocial parameters (25, 147), and academic outcomes (200) in
youth. In addition, ongoing participation in resistance training has
been found to reduce injuries in sport and recreational activities
(186, 224) and improve motor skills and powerf ul sporting
movements (14 , 40, 177).
FIGURE 7.3 Theor etical interactive model for the integr ation of developmental factors
related to the potential f or muscular str ength adaptations and perf ormance.
Reprinted by permission from A.D. Faigenbaum, R.S. Lloyd, and G.D. Myer, GD, “Youth Resistance Training: Past
Practices, New Perspectives, and Future Directions,” Pediatric Exercise Science 25, no. 4 (2013): 591-604.
406
From a clinical perspectiv e, it has been reported that muscular
fitness is associated with lower obesity, insulin resistance, and
cardiovascular risk among children and adolescents (43, 84). Of
note, meta- analytical data indicate that resistance training can
reduce body fat in children and adolescents who are overweight or
obese (153). The grades for indicators of youth physical activity
around the world are low, which suggests a widespr ead crisis of
physical inactiv ity (6). Children who are obese or those who lead
sedentary lives (e.g., who take a bus to school and watch television
or play computer games after school and on weekends) are not
ready for 1 to 2 hours of sport training four or five days a week.
Current globa l findings based on a pooled analysis of 3,663
population-r epresentativ e studies with 222 million children,
adolescents, and adults found the burden of obesity has increased
and the age of onset of obesity has decreased in most countries
(39). Specific to the United States, data from 2013 to 2016 show
that 17.8% (95% confidence interv al [CI], 16.1%-19.6%) of
American youth aged 2 through 19 years were obese and the
prevalence of severe obesity was 5.8% (95% CI, 4.8%-6.9%) (174),
and the prevalence of many cardiovascular disease risk factors are
projected to increase over the next 30 years (118). Although the
treatment of childhood obesity is complex, it seems that obese youth
enjoy resistanc e training because it is not aerobical ly taxing and
provides an opportuni ty for all participants to experience success
and feel good about their perf ormance.
In addition to the high prevalence of childhood obesity, other
concerning trends in muscul ar fitness in youth are for those who
engage in organized sports or recreational physical activities (66).
For example, resear ch indicates that within various cohorts of
school- aged children, a range of muscular strength measur es (e.g.,
bent-arm hang and handgrip strength) (51, 206, 209) and motor
skill competencies (20, 36, 206) have shown a decrease. Therefore,
while all aspiring young athletes will likely benefi t from preparatory
condi tioning inclusiv e of resistance training, it seems that those who
407
might benefi t the most are the ones who are less fit to begin with.
This notion underl ines the importance of practitioners understanding
and advocating for long-term athletic development as a fundamental
concept f or all youth (137).
While resistance training does not affect the genot ypic maximum,
it probably has a favorable influence on growth at any stage of
development, as long as appropriate guidel ines are followed (70). In
fact, regular participation in an exercise program that includes
resistance training and weight-bearing physical activities has been
shown to enhance bone miner al density in children and adolescents
(50, 221). In support of these observ ations, it has been reported
that elite adolescent weightl ifters who regularly train with heavy
weights while performing multijoint exercises displa y levels of bone
density well above values of age-matched controls (41, 180). These
findings may be especial ly important for girls who are at an
increased risk for developing  osteoporosis  later in life, a clinical
condi tion characteriz ed by low bone mass and an increased
susceptibi lity to fractures (231).
Every year, millions of physical activity–related injuries occur
during leisure time and sport participation among children and
adolescents (23, 196), and it has been estimated that more than
50% of overuse injuries sustained by children could be prevented
with simple approaches including coaching education, preparatory
condi tioning, delayed special ization, adequate time off from
organized sport, and proper nutrition and sleep (23, 131, 224).
Strength and condi tioning professionals can play a pivotal role in
preparing young athletes for sport and thereby minimiz e or offset
the incidence and severity of sport-related injuries common to young
athletes. In many cases, modern-da y youth who enroll in organized
sport programs are unfit and ill-prepared to handle the demands of
their chosen sport. It has also been suggested that regular
participation in a preseason  condi tioning program that includes
resistance training may increase a young athlete’ s resistance to
injury (53, 186, 232). Howev er, given that neuromuscular  control in
408
young soccer players has been shown to decline throughout a
competi tive season (143) and that injury incidence fluctuates during
different phases of the season (e.g., immediately after returning
from annual holiday periods)  (198, 226), it is prudent for youth to
look beyond resistance training as a preseason activity and instead
continue to engage in a modified and periodiz ed resistance training
program throughout the competi tive season and during the
postseason and of f-season to r educe the risk of subsequent injury .
The goal should be for all children and adolescents to
engage in long-term, periodized athletic development
programs (inclusive of resistance exercise) rather than
short-term programs to enhance physical fitness and
reduce the risk of injury.
Early sport special ization  is defined as children engaging in
intensiv e, year-round (>8 months) training and/or competi tion in a
single sport, typical ly beginning during the prepubertal years (131).
Traditional early special ization sports included gymnasti cs, dance,
and swimming; howev er, there is a growing trajectory of youth
opting to special ize in other sports at younger ages (21). In many
cases, early sport specia lization results in young athletes
accumulating weekly training volumes that exceed recommended
guidel ines (21, 202). Even though some coaches argue that early
sport special ization is the key to success, this notion has been
challenged in the literature (21, 114, 131). Notably , meta- analytical
data from 51 studies indicated that while sampl ing a diverse range
of sports led to more measur ed initial progress, it was associated
with more sustainable long-term development toward sporting
excellence (96). Resear ch has indicated that youth who participate in
a single sport or special ize in a single position at an early age may
be at a greater risk of serious injury (114, 150, 238) and overuse
injuries (113), developing anterior knee pain (101), possessing less
desirable lower limb jump-landing biomechanics (101), and
409
overtraining and potential burnout (22, 47). Additional ly, it seems
that late special ization and involvement in a variety of sports and
activities during the younger years may be better related to sporting
success at a later age (21, 72, 78, 96, 159). Although the total
elimination of youth sport injuries is an unrealistic goal, the addition
of resistance training as part of a long-term athletic development
program may better prepare the young athlete to handle the
duration and magni tude of unanticipated forces that develop in
practice and game situations (65, 106), whether or not they have
special ized. Because of individual differences in growth, matur ation,
and stress tolerance, resistance training intensi ty, volume, and rate
of progression need to be carefully prescribed since this form of
training adds to the chronic repetitive stress placed on the
developing musculosk eletal system. Proper progression and program
variation will optimiz e gains, prevent boredom, and reduce the stress
that can lead to overtraining. This will be particularly effective when
practitioners use reliable data to help inform decision-making around
program design, and this evidence-inf ormed approach will also work
well with those young athletes who have special ized (163).
Additional ly, well-planned recovery strategies (e.g., proper cool-
down, postex ercise meal or snack, and adequate sleep) can help to
maximiz e training adaptations.
Because many sports have a significant strength or power
component, it is attractive to assume that resistance training will
enhance athletic performan ce. Though comments from parents,
coaches, and children support this contention, scienti fic reports on
this issue are constr ained by the ability to compr ehensiv ely define
and quanti fy “performance. ” Howev er, improvements in selected
motor performance skills, such as the long jump, vertical jump, 30-
meter (27 yd) sprint, and agility run, have been observ ed in children
who participate d in a resistance training program of between 8 and
20 weeks (14, 40, 71, 135, 160, 187). Although direct evaluations of
the effects of youth resistance training on sport performance are
often based on proxy measur es of performance, a progressive
410
resistance training program will in all likelihood result in some
degree of improvement in sport performance in young athletes (57,
89, 102, 133, 134 , 210).
Potential Risks and Concerns
Appropriately prescribed youth resistance training programs are
relatively safe when compar ed with other sports and activities in
which children and adolescents regularly participate (139, 181).
Paradoxically, it seems that the forces placed on the joints of young
athletes during  sport participation may be far greater, and more
difficult to anticipate, than those gener ated from resistance training
programs (65). The belief that resistance training is danger ous for
children is not consistent with the needs of children and the
documented risks associated with this type of training. Children and
adolescents have been injured in the weight room; howev er, such
injuries are more likely to be accidental (98, 169) and typically occur
in cases in which the levels of supervision and instruction, technical
competency , and training loads are inappr opriate (65). This
highlights the need for strength and condi tioning professionals to
heed safety guidel ines when working with younger populations.
Although epiph yseal plate fractures have been reported in
adolescents who were resistance training, these reports were case
studies and typical ly involved the performance of heavy overhead
lifts in unsupervised settings (97, 203, 207). An epiph yseal plate
fracture has not been reported in any prospectiv e youth resistance
training study that adher ed to establ ished training guidel ines (65).
Of note, 1-repetition maximum (1RM) testing (62, 64, 81) and
maximal isometric assessments in children and adolescents (48, 162,
167) has proven to be safe, provided that appropriate testing
guidel ines are followed (i.e., adequate warm-up periods,  individual
progression of loads, and close supervision of technical
competency). If children and adolescents are taught how to
resistance train properly and understand resistance training
411
guidel ines and procedur es, the risk of an epiph yseal plate fracture is
minimal.
Dispelling  the Myths of Youth Resistance
Training
A wealth of evidence proves children and adolescents can safely and effectively
engage in resistance training to promote improvements in physical fitness, reduce
the risk of sport-related injury , and enhance measur es of health and well-being.
Howev er, there still remain certain  unfounded myths among some health
professionals that ma y deter y outh f rom engaging in r esistance tr aining (67).
Resistance training stunts bone growth.
False! Resistance training stimulates bone remodel ing and strengthens bone,
muscular tissue, and connectiv e tissue during chi ldhood and adolescence.
Resistance training is unsafe for children.
False! With correct technique, appropriate loading, and high-qual ity instruction,
resistance tr aining is a saf e method of tr aining f or all youth.
Resistance training is only for young athletes.
False! Resistance training promotes positive physical and psychosocial adaptations
in all youth, r egardless of whether they participate in competi tive sports.
Children need to wait until puberty to realize the benefits of
resistance training.
False! Resear ch clearly shows that young children can make meaningf ul gains in
physical fitness following resistance training. Children should be psychological ly
matur e enough to understand and f ollow instructions.
Young girls and boys will become “bulky.”
False! Studies have shown that resistance training during childhood stimulates
neuromuscular adaptations. During adolescence, boys will likely increase muscle
mass, but the lower levels of circulating androgens in girls mean they will
experience lower lev els of absolute muscle gr owth.
Program Design Considerations for
Children
It is important to view resistance training as part of a well-rounded
long-term athletic development program for a child that also
addresses other fitness goals (e.g., speed, power , balance,
coordination, endur ance). Although there is no minimal age
412
requirement for participation in a youth resistance training program,
children should have the emotional maturi ty to receive and follow
directions and should want to try this type of activity (139, 215). A
pretraining medical examina tion is not mandatory for appar ently
healthy children; howev er, all participants should be screened for
any injury or illness that may limit or prevent safe participation in a
resistance training program (215). The goals of youth resistance
training programs should not be limited to increasing muscular
strength but should also include teaching children about their
bodies, promoting an interest in physical activity, teaching weight
room etiquet te, and having fun. It seems likely that children who
enjoy participating in physical activities and sport are more likely to
be activ e later in l ife (220).
Two important areas of concern in the development of youth
resistance training programs are the quality of instruction and rate of
progression. Strength and condi tioning professionals must have a
thorough understanding of youth resistance training guidel ines, an
ability and willingness to demonstr ate proper exercise technique,
and the requisi te pedagogical skills to speak with children at a level
they understand (59, 137, 139). Professionals should deemphasiz e
competi tion between participants and focus on proper technique
instead of the amount of weight lifted. Differentiating training
sessions can enable practitioners to meet the needs of individual
children even when delivering sessions to groups of young athletes.
Designing and delivering training programs that pursue a common
goal (i.e., movement skill and muscular strength development) but
have differentiating levels (e.g., technical difficulty, intensity, range
of motion, movement speed) can also be a useful approach to allow
for individual ization based on the athletes’ ability. While some form
of variation needs to be applied to achiev e ongoing adaptation, this
should be applied in a logical and progressive manner , and it is
important to keep the program fresh and challenging. Children
should be given an opportuni ty to develop proper form and
technique, and there should be a balance between repeated
413
opportuni ties to practice and master skills versus introducing new
stimul i to keep sessions f un and engaging.
To optimiz e any training program, practitioners should conduct an
initial assessment of the individual’ s characteristics (i.e., physical,
technical, psychosocial) and the demands of the sport or physical
activity in which he or she participates, commonly known as a
needs analysis . With this information collated, practitioners can
then adopt an appropriate assessment battery on relevant measur es
of physical performance and injury risk, in addition to estimations of
maturi ty status. Similarly, consider ation should be given to the long-
term aspirations of the child prior to finalizing the training program.
Of course, it should be recogniz ed that the level of sophistication
and rigor of the needs analysis and assessment process is context
specific; completing this preliminary work is far easier for a
practitioner working one on one with a small number of children in a
private facility compar ed to another teacher or coach working in a
high school setting that is responsible for the programming of
hundr eds of school- aged children. Regardless of the situation, it is
important to have some understanding of the current training status
of the chi ld to know how to construct the pr ogram.
Although only limited data are available regarding the relationship
between repetitions and selected percentages of the 1RM in
children, it appears that the number of repetitions that can be
performed at a given percentage of the 1RM is specific to the given
exercise (68). Thus, the minimal strength threshold, when expressed
as a percentage of 1RM, may vary between muscle groups, possibly
due to the amount of muscle mass involved with each exercise.
While practitioners have safely used 1RM (62) and isometric mid-
thigh pull testing (160) to determine strength levels in youth within
resear ch settings and sport environments, where this is not possible
(perhaps owing  to time limitations, class size, lack of equipment or
coach expertise), alternativ e means of assessing strength could be
used. Strength and condi tioning professionals can use predictiv e
equations that estimate 1RM loads from multiple submaximal
414
repetitions (e.g., 5RM or 10RM) (139). Howev er, strength and
condi tioning professionals should recogniz e that such approaches
might place the child at heightened risk of injury due to the
cumulativ e fatiguing effects of multiple repetitions on technical form.
In order to obtain a surrogate  measur e of muscular strength without
the use of repetition maximum schemes, practitioners could use
field-based measur es of different jump protocols (e.g., vertical jump
or long jump) or handgrip strength, measur es that have been
significantly correlated to 1RM values in youth (29, 157). Irrespectiv e
of the strength testing protocol used, the child or adolescent must
be able to demonstr ate and maintain correct technical competency
throughout the entire test under the watchful eye of a qualified
professional.
Advanced multijoint exercises such as the snatch and clean and
jerk can be incorpor ated into a child’s program at the appropriate
time (i.e., after foundational strength and technique progressions
have been completed), but the primary focus, especial ly early in a
resistance training program, should be on developing motor skill
competency and muscle strength (168, 194). The athletic motor
skill competencies (AMSC)  have been proposed to represent the
foundational movements that underpin all athletic movements
(figure 7.4; 194). To develop well-rounded athleticism in youth,
practitioners are encour aged to design programs that increase both
form (i.e., technical compete ncy) and function (i.e., force-producing
capabi lities) in each of the AMSC. Practitioners do not necessari ly
need to expose youth to all of the AMSC in each session, but they
should be targeted at various points throughout the training program
(194).
Poor techniqu e can put abnormal stress on musculosk eletal
tissues and lead to injury . The resistance must be lower ed if proper
exercise techn ique cannot be maintained. When learning new
exercises, children should start with an unloaded barbel l, a long
wooden stick, or PVC piping  to learn the correct techn ique. The
importance of correct feedba ck, delivered at the correct time and in
415
the correct manner , cannot be overestimated during this stage of
development to ensur e the facilitation of skill development. Youth
training should involve ongoing grading and evaluation of the
technical performance of different exercises by a trained observ er
(periodical ly from formal assessment but consistently during sessions
via coach observ ations), as opposed to simply assessing
performance measur es (e.g., load lifted or the velocity of movement)
(60). Such an approach can be used to continual ly educate young
athletes about proper exercise technique, raise awareness about
common technical flaws, and provide coaches and teach ers with a
tool for assess ing learning during practice or physical education. A
summary of youth resistance  training guidel ines is presented in the
sidebar .
FIGURE 7.4  The spectrum of athletic motor ski ll competencies (AMSC).
Reprinted by permission from J.M. Radnor, S. Moeskops, S.L Morris, et al., “Developing Athletic Motor Skill
Competencies in Youth,” Strength Conditioning Journal 42, no. 6 (2020): 54-70.
416
Youth Resistance Training Guidelines
Each child should understand the benefi ts and risks associated with
resistance tr aining.
Competent and caring strength and condi tioning professionals should design
and supervise training sessions based primari ly on the desired training
adaptation and technical competency but also with consider ation to growth
and matur ation.
The exercise environment should be safe and free of hazar ds, and the
equipment should be appr opriately siz ed to fi t each chi ld.
Dynamic warm-up exercises, movement challenges, and opportuni ties for
explor atory pla y should be perf ormed bef ore resistance tr aining.
When appropriate, static stretching exercises should be performed after
resistance tr aining.
Carefully moni tor each chi ld’s toler ance to the ex ercise str ess.
Begin wi th light loads to al low appr opriate adjustments to be made.
Increase the resistance gradual ly (e.g., 5%-10%) as technique and strength
improve.
Depending on individual needs and goals, different set × repetition
combinations (e.g., 3 × 5) can be performed on a variety of single- and
multijoint exercises (and those targeting the strengthening of the core
musculatur e).
Advanced multijoint exercises, such as the snatch and clean and jerk, may be
incorpor ated into the program, provided that appropriate loads are used and
technical pr oficiency r emains a k ey outcome.
Two or three nonco nsecutiv e training sessions per week are recommended;
howev er, youth with higher training ages may participate in more frequent
resistance tr aining sessions per week.
When necessary , adult spotters should be nearb y to actively assist the child in
the ev ent of a f ailed repetition (e.g. , bench pr ess or squat).
The resistance training program should be systematical ly periodiz ed
throughout the year to ensur e that the child or adolescent is exposed to a
sequential and varied training stimul us with adequate rest and recovery
between tr aining cy cles.
Adapted from Faigenbaum et al. (2009) and Lloyd et al. (2014)
417
Older Adults
The number of men and women over the age of 65 continues to
rise, and more opportuni ties for participation in sports ranging from
marathon running to weightl ifting are available to older athletes.
While the cardiovascular endur ance and muscular strength of older
competi tors or masters athletes are truly exceptional, even the most
highly trained athletes experience some decline in performance after
age 30 (83, 107). For example, competi tive weightl ifting ability has
been shown to decline with age at a rate of approximately 1% to
1.5% per year until approximately age 70, after which a more
dramatic decrease occurs (152). Older individuals who do not
engage in physical activity typical ly see greater decrements in
several physical performance measur es and increase their risk of
debilitating injury (95, 182). Strength and condi tioning professionals
should understand the physiological changes that occur with aging
and the associated trainabi lity of older individuals. In addition, the
potential health risks associated with physical activity for older
individuals need to be consider ed.
Age-Related Changes in Musc uloskeletal
Health
Significant changes in body composi tion with advancing age can lead
to the development of physical functional impairments and injury .
The well-docum ented loss of bone and muscle with age not only
makes activities of daily life such as getting out of a chair and
opening a window more difficult but also increases the risk for falls,
fractures, and long-term disabi lity (37, 95). Bones become fragile
with age because of a decrease in bone miner al content that causes
an increase in bone porosity. The bone miner al content and
microarchitectur e of bone can deterior ate to such an extent that the
risk of bone fracture, particu larly of the hip, spine, or wrist during a
fall, is increased (2, 76). Osteopenia  is defined by a bone miner al
418
density between −1 and −2.5 standar d deviations (SD) of the young
adult mean, whereas osteo porosis is defined by a bone miner al
density below −2.5 SD of the young adult mean (119). These
condi tions, which result in bones with less density and strength, are
serious concerns for older people (particularly women) because they
heighten the risk of skeletal fracture and poor bone health (2). The
slow but progressive loss of bone with age has been linked to
physical inactivi ty and to hormonal, nutritional, mechanical, and
genetic factors (7, 11). Figure 7.5 shows  the structur al difference
between normal, healthy bone and bone at the stage of
osteopor osis.
FIGURE 7.5 Structur al differences between  (a) normal, healthy bone, and bone at the
stage of  (b) osteopor osis.
© Paul Gunning / Science Source
Advancing age is also associated with a loss of muscle mass,
strength, and function (19, 38). The term sarcopenia  refers to a
progressive and gener alized skeletal muscle disorder that is
associated with an increased likelihood of adverse outcomes
including falls, fractures, physical disabi lity, and mortal ity (42).
Computed tomogr aphy has revealed that after age 30 there is a
decrease in the cross-sectional areas of individual muscles, along
with a decrease in muscle density, reductions in tendon compl iance,
419
and an increase in intramuscular fat (2, 110). These changes seem
to be a predictable consequence of advancing age and seem to be
most pronounced in women (110). The observ ed muscle atrophy
with aging appears to result from physical inactivi ty and a gradual
and selectiv e denerv ation of type II muscle fibers (136, 192, 237).
Decreased muscle mass results in a loss of muscle strength. In one
report, 40% of women aged 55 to 64 years, 45% of women aged 65
to 74 years, and 65% of women aged 75 to 84 years were unable to
lift about 10 pounds (4.5 kg) (115). The reduction in the size and
number and the gradual denerv ation of muscle fibers (100, 192) and
the age-related changes in motor unit morphology and properties
(108, 204) also lead to a decrease in the ability of a muscle to
gener ate power (i.e., exert force rapidly); in fact, power recedes at a
faster rate than muscle strength with aging (79). Since everyday
activities require a certain degree of power production, a decrease in
the ability of muscles to produce force rapidly may adversely affect
the ability of older adults to safely perform activities such as stair
climbing and walking. Factors  that may contribute to the age-related
decline in muscle strength and power include reductions  in muscle
mass, nervous system changes, hormonal changes, poor nutrition,
and physical inactivi ty (16, 112). The functional consequences of
these age-related changes are significant because the magni tude
and rate of change influence the age at which a person may become
functional ly dependent (e.g., unable to perform household tasks or
rise from a chair) or reach a threshold of disabi lity. A summary of
adaptations to aging and resistance training is presente d in table
7.1.
TABLE 7.1  Summary of the Effects of Aging and
Resistance Training
Physical or physiological variable Effect of aging Effect of resistance training
Muscular str ength Decreases Increases
Muscular power Decreases Increases
420
Physical or physiological variable Effect of aging Effect of resistance training
Muscular endur ance Decreases Increases
Muscle mass Decreases Increases
Muscle fiber siz e Decreases Increases
Muscular metabol ic capaci ty Decreases Increases
Resting metabol ic rate Decreases Increases
Body fat Increases Decreases
Bone miner al densi ty Decreases Increases
Physical f unction Decreases Increases
Advancing age is associated with a loss of muscle
power, muscle strength, and muscle mass, which is
largely attrib utable to physical inactivity. A direct result
of these losses is a decrease in functional independence
and an increased risk of falls and fractures.
Age-Related Changes in N euromuscular
Function
Seniors are at an increased risk of falling, which can lead to serious
health, psychosocial, and economic consequences that negativ ely
affect overall quality of life. Specifically, falls can result in pain
syndr omes, joint dislocations, skeletal fractures, limitation s on daily
functional activities, and a reduction in self-confidence (95, 211).
Falls can also lead to permanent disabi lity, institutional ization, and
fatalities (46). Intrinsic factors that lead to increased risk of falls in
seniors include decrements in muscle strength and power (190),
reaction time (2), and impair ed balance and postur al stability (205).
Muscle activity before (preactivation ) and immediately following
(cocontraction ) contact with the ground is an important mediator
of braking and dynamic stabilization in both young and old
individuals. Increased preactiv ation helps increase stiffness of the
421
limb using fast stretch reflexes to better prepare the limb for ground
contact. Cocontr action is a motor control strategy that dynamical ly
stabilizes the joint; howev er, due to the simultaneous activation of
both the agonist and antagonist muscle groups crossing the same
joint, net joint moments and agonistic force outputs are reduced
(236). Resear ch shows that seniors rely on increased levels of
muscle cocontr action as a compensatory mechanism to offset their
increased balance difficulties and to minimiz e postur al sway (171).
Resear ch also highlights that reduced mechanical power output
when walking (especial ly during the push-of f phase) of is one of the
biomechanical aging features of gait (45). Intuitively, this literature
would suggest that older adults should use a variety of training
modes specifically designed to offset these natural reductions in
neuromuscular function. Such methods include low-intensi ty
plyometrics, strength training, balance and dynamic stabilization
exercises, and proprioception training to develop the ability to react
more efficiently wi th the gr ound (92, 95, 189).
Physical activity interv entions can be effective in improving
neuromuscular function and preventing falls in seniors (95, 112,
222). Howev er, simply increasing physical activity will not prevent
falls on its own. Rather, seniors must engage with, and adher e to,
multidimensional, periodiz ed programs that incorpor ate elements of
both resistance and balance training (76, 112, 222). Furthermor e,
current guidel ines suggest that as with any population, training
programs for seniors should overload progressively to promote a
challenging training environment, and that training should be
completed on a frequent basis to provide individuals with a sufficient
training dosag e (76). Of note, resistance training as a stand-alone
training method does not seem to prevent the risk of falls (211), and
balance and flexibi lity training must accompan y resistance training in
order to pr ovide the r equisi te training stimulus to r educe f all risk.
Aerobic exercise should also be featured in a well-balanced
exercise program for older adults, because data indicate that
concurr ent strength and aerobic endur ance training can be delivered
422
together to improve multiple measur es of physical fitness (8).
Notably , maximal aerobic power decreases with age in adults as a
consequence of various physiological changes that accompan y
aging; for exam ple, muscle mass and strength decreased  (130) and
fat mass increases (129), with men showing a more rapid decline
than women (233). On average, when women and men are matched
by age, the aerobic power values of women range from 73% to 85%
of the values of men (229); howev er, the gener al physiological
response to training in later life is equiv ocal between men and
women (4, 183). The differences in aerobic power may be caused by
several factors, including women’s higher percentage of body fat and
lower blood hemoglobin values and men’s larger heart size and
blood volume (24, 34). Notwi thstanding the importance of a varied
training program, the relative importance and potency of resistance
training in increasing muscular strength, muscular power , and bone
miner al density, while counter acting the age-related declines in
contractile function and muscle atrophy, in addition to its many other
health benefi ts for seniors, cannot be o verlook ed (76).
Resistance Training for Older Adults
Aging does not appear to enhance or reduce the ability of the
musculosk eletal system to adapt to resistance exercise, and as a
training mode,  resistance training can be an efficacious tool against
the declines associated with sarcopenia (28). Significant
improvements in muscular strength, muscular power , muscle mass,
bone miner al density, and functional capabi lities (e.g., gait speed)
have been observ ed in older people who participated in progressive
resistance training programs (76, 112, 145). For older adults, such
improvements enhance exercise performance, decrease the risk for
injury , promote independent living, and improve quality of life.
Because of the age-related  changes in musculosk eletal health,
resistance exercise is a beneficial mode of training for older
populations who need to enhance musculosk eletal strength and
power and resist decrements in muscle mass, bone miner al density,
423
and functional abilities. Resistance training can also improve mobility
and enhance physical functioning that enable seniors to perform
activities of daily living (ADL)  and preserv e independence (76).
Furthermor e, data also show that muscular strength is an important
factor for reducing the risk of cardiovascular disease, type 2
diabetes, cancer mortal ity, and al l-cause mortal ity (87, 164).
Resistance training provides a highly effective means of
attenuating physiological changes associated with
aging, impro ving physica l function, and decreasin g the
risk of chronic health conditions.
Responsiveness to Resistance Training in Older
Adults
A great deal of attention has focused on strategies to improve the
musculosk eletal health of older men and women. Because of the
decondi tioned state of many seniors, desirable changes in muscle
strength and function can result from a variety of resistan ce training
protocols, particularly during the first few weeks of training (82).
Previously sedentary older men have more than doubled knee
extensor strength and tripled knee flexor strength following a 12-
week resistance training program (80), and similar observ ations have
been made in older women after 12 weeks of resistance training
(33). In a seminal study, the ability of very old men and women (87-
96 years old) to improve muscular strength was demonstr ated
following only eight weeks of resistance training (73). Meta-
analytical data has indicated  that in a sample of more than 800
seniors aged 75 to 97 years of age, resistance training significantly
increased measur es of muscle strength and increases in whole-
muscle hypertr ophy (94). Meta- analytical data also show that while
sex differences may exist in resistance training adaptations in seniors
when data are consider ed on an absolute basis with males making
larger gains than females, these sex differences are removed, or in
some measur es reversed, when data are interpr eted on a relative
424
scale (117). Collectively, resistance training appears to be an
effective means to mi tigate age-r elated dynapenia  (76).
Improvements in gait speed , stair-climbing ability, balance, and
overall spontaneous activity have also been associated with training-
induced strength gains in older populations (145). Declines in muscle
power are associated with disabi lity and the ability to perform ADL,
particularly in females (112),  and the need to minimiz e age-related
deficits in muscle power is an important part of exercise prescription
for seniors (76, 112). Evidence indicates that resistance training
specific to power development may help optimiz e functional abilities
in older adults (2, 92, 178) and that power training may be as
effective as traditional resistance training in developing muscle
architectur e and neuromuscular activation properties of the lower
limb (230). In some instanc es, it has been suggested that high-
velocity power training has a greater influence on the ability to
produce explosiv e force than traditional progressive resistance
training (92, 191). For example, Fielding and colleagues (74) showed
that older adults who completed high-velocity resistance training
made greater gains in peak power and similar gains in maximum
strength compar ed to seniors  who trained at slower velocities over a
16-week training period. Similar results were reported by Reid and
colleagues (199); in that study, older adults who completed a high-
velocity, high-p ower resistan ce training program made significantly
greater gains in leg press peak power than individuals who followed
a slow-velocity, progressive resistance training program. While the
optimal training protocol for improving muscular strength and power
in seniors is not known, it appears a dose–r esponse relationship
exists between training intensi ty and improvements in muscular
strength and power (44), with higher -intensi ty resistance training
being more effective in developing maximal muscle strength than
moder ate- or low -intensi ty training (9, 214).
Regular participation in a resistance training program also seems
to have profound anabol ic effects in older populations (33, 73, 80).
Computed tomogr aphy and muscle biopsy analysis showe d evidence
425
of muscle hypertr ophy in older men who participated in a high-
intensi ty resistance training program (80), and other investigations
involving older adults have shown that resistance training can
improve nitrogen retention, which can have a positive effect on
muscle protein metabol ism (27, 239). Meta- analytical data have
indicated that resistance training is also an effective treatment to
improve body fat mass and for muscle strength and performance in
seniors diagnosed with sarcopenia (35). Resistance training has also
been shown to have an important effect on energy balance in older
adults, as evidenced by an increase in the resting metabol ic rate of
men and women who resistance train (26). It is noteworth y that
dietary modifications (a change in total food intake or selected
nutrients) in addition to resistance training promotes a greater
hypertr ophic response than resistance training alone in older men
(154).
Although the response of bone to resistance exercise is influenced
by a complex interaction of many variables (e.g., hormo nal status,
activity history , and nutrition), it has been reported that resistance
exercise has a positive effect on bone health in older men and
women (103, 173). Regula rly performed resistance training can
offset the age-related declines in bone health by maintaining or
increasing bone mineral density (BMD). Notably, meta- analytical
data on 1,130 participants  (mean age ~70 yrs) indicate that
progressive resistance training programs stimulated significant
increases in muscle strength and BMD of the femur/hip , with
adaptations in both strength and BMD favoring lower volumes and
higher external loads (173). Furthermor e, a systematic review of 25
studies indicated that while ≥2 sessio ns per week of high-velocity
resistance training can significantly increase BMD, skeletal
adaptations can be lost when resistance training is stopped for >6
months (103). Resear chers have also documented that some
strength, power , and fiber type adaptations in older men are only
partial ly preserv ed after just 12 weeks of detraining; howev er,
strength gains can be recovered following a period of retraining (18).
426
Collectively, these studies show the transient nature of
neuromuscular adaptations and underl ine the importance of viewing
resistance training as a lifelong commi tment. Resistance training
may also reduce the risk of osteopor otic fractures by improving
dynamic balance, muscle mass, and overall level of physical activity
(2). While resistance exercise undoubtedly can improve bone health
in older adults, the interaction of exercise with hormonal and
nutritional factors influences the degree of benefi t of the exercise
program. Furthermor e, bones retain the beneficial effects of exercise
only as long as training is continued. During periods of inactivi ty,
bone densi ty tends to r evert to pr eexercise lev els (111).
Older men and women can make significant
improvements in strength, power, mobility, and
functional ability in response to periodized and
progressive resistance training. Aerobic, resistance, and
balance exercise are all beneficial for older adults, but
only resistance training can increase muscular strength,
muscular power, and muscle mass.
Program Design Considerations for Older Adults
Resistance training is currently recogniz ed as an important
component of a well-rounded  fitness program for older adults (2, 76,
112). Because age-related losses of musculosk eletal strength, power ,
and mass may be almost universal, programs designed to maintain
or improve musculosk eletal health in older adults should be
implemented. Not only can regular participation in a resistance
training program offset some  of these age-related losses, but it can
help older people maintain a more active, higher -quality lifestyle and
promote psy chological and cogni tive well-being (76, 112).
The fundamen tal principles of designing a resistance training
program for an older person and a younger person are basical ly the
same, but strength and condi tioning professionals need to consider
several concerns when working with seniors. Attention should be
427
given to preexisting medical ailments, prior training history , and
nutritional status before the beginning of a resistance training
program that may predispose seniors to increased risk of exercise-
induced injury or illness. Even though older populations retain the
capaci ty to adapt to increased levels of physical activity, safe and
effective exercise guidel ines must be f ollowed.
Before participation in an exercise program, seniors should
complete a medical history and risk factor questionnair e (76).
Potential limitations and possible restrictions for physical activity can
be ascertained from this information. In some cases, physician
clearance is required before the initiation of a moder ate or vigorous
exercise program (76)—f or example, in cardiac rehabilitation
patients or cancer surviv ors. Any questions regarding a participant ’s
medical status (e.g., heart disease, hypertension, arthri tis,
osteopor osis, or diabetes mellitus) should be answer ed by a health
professional. After this information has been obtained, a preprogram
evaluation to document baseline measur ements and assess
responses to specific exercise modal ities should be performed.
Although a treadmi ll exercise test is often used to evaluate
cardiovascular responses to aerobic exercise, a strength test
(preferably on the equipment used in training) should be performed
to assess responses to resistance exercise and aid in the exercise
prescription. Of note, while resistance machines may be used in the
early stages of a training program with older adults due to balance
and flexibi lity limitations, where appropriate, older adults should
sensibly incorpor ate free weight, multijoint resistance training
exercises into the program to provide a greater overall training
stimulus and place a greater demand on postur al stability. Various
methods of assessing muscular strength, including repetition
maximum testing, can be reliably used in senior populations,
provided that appropriate testing guidel ines are followed (76).
Strength and condi tioning professionals should be aware of the
potential risks of breath holding (Valsalv a maneuv er) for older adults
(76). While the Valsalv a mane uver assists in stabilizing the trunk and
428
vertebr al column during performance of various resistance training
exercises, owing to the sudden rise in systol ic and diastol ic blood
pressure that the technique creates, this technique is gener ally
discour aged in seniors (1, 149), especial ly in those individuals with
absolute and relative contraindications (e.g., those with coronary
heart disease, uncontr olled hypertension, musculosk eletal
limitations, and pacemak ers or defibri llators) (76).
Evidence suggests that resistance training can be safe for seniors
when individuals adher e to appropriate training guidel ines (2, 76,
112). On the other hand, poorly designed programs can be
potential ly hazar dous. For example, failing to provide sufficient rest
periods betwee n sets and between different exercises, programming
exercises that are technical ly too challenging, or increasing the
intensi ty of exercise (typical ly the external load against which the
individual is working) all increase the likelihood of resistance
training–r elated injury . Like the situation with youth populations, the
resistance training stimulus should not be increased at the expense
of technical competency f or older adul ts.
Untrained seniors who begin resistance training should start at a
relatively low exercise intensi ty and volume, and the exercise
prescription should be individual ized (76). Notably , meta-analytical
data have indicated that while single sets provided adequate
stimulus for adaptations in upper body strength, multiple sets
produced greater improvements in lower -limb muscle strength and
muscle quality in older adults (148). Although higher intensi ties and
volumes can be tolerated by some older men and women  who have
resistance training experience, the early phase of the training
program should be directed toward emphasizing the benefi ts of
resistance training, addressing individual needs, building confidence,
and learning proper exercise technique while minimizing the
potential for muscle soreness and injury . Less intense training during
the first few weeks of an exercise program may also be beneficial for
seniors who are apprehensiv e about participating in a resistance
training program. Following the initial adaptation period, the training
429
program can gradual ly progress if it continues to meet the needs
and medical concerns of each person. In training older men and
women, it is particularly important to focus on the interaction of
major muscle groups used in everyday activities, such as load
carrying and cl imbing stairs.
During the early stages of a resistance training program
for older adults, investing in education, reducing
anxieties, and building confidence are key outcom es to
promote long-term engagement.
Once participants master the performance of basic resistance
exercises, more advanced and demanding exercises such as standing
postur es with free weights (barbells and dumbbel ls), multidirectional
medicine ball exercises, and advanced balance training (e.g., single-
leg stands and circle turns) can be incorpor ated into the program.
Seniors should  gradual ly progress from 1 set of 8 to 12 repetitions at
a relatively low intensi ty (e.g., 40%-50% 1RM) to higher training
volumes and intensi ties (e.g., 3 sets per exercise with 60%-80% of
1RM), depending on individual needs, goals, and abilities (76, 82).
The current consensus indica tes that for each of the primary muscle
groups, older adults should progress toward 2 or 3 sets of 6 to 12
repetitions of one or two multijoint exercises, working at 70% to
85% of the 1RM, two or three times per week (76). In addition,
high-velocity power exercises can be gradual ly incorpor ated into the
overall training regimen if seniors have successfully completed a
gener al resistance training program. Current recommendations for
increasing power in healthy older adults include the performance of
1 to 3 sets per exercise with a light to moder ate load (40%-60%
1RM) in concentric movements for 6 to 10 repetitions with high
repetition velocity (76). Howev er, plyometrics can also serve as an
effective means to develop high rate-of -force development in various
expressions of the stretch-shortening cycle in older adults when
properly pr ogrammed in supervised set tings (227).
430
Dispelling  the Fears of Resistance Training
for Older Adults
Despi te the publicized benefi ts of resistance exercise for older adults,
misper ceptions remain about the notion of lifting weights. Literature has noted the
phenomenon of a “fear of resistance exercise,” which can lead to older adults
demonstr ating avoidance behavior to resistance exercise due to apprehension,
anxiet y, or a lack of confidence (4). Similarly, a lack of awareness or understa nding
can be a barrier to older adults participating in resistance exercise, which
underl ines the importance of correct education and the promotion of individu alized
approaches (31, 109). To dispel the fears of resistance training, certain  key
messages should be pr omoted to older populations:
Resistance training can cause injury to the musculoskeletal system
in older adults.
False! When programs are technique focuse d, individual ized, and designed and
delivered by appropriately qualified professionals, resistance training is a safe and
effective mode of training for older adults and can promote positive adaptatio ns in
both muscle and bone (76).
Resistance training is not safe for older adults with cardiovascular
or musculoskeletal contraindications.
False! Resistance training  can easily be modified to accommodate for such
contraindications. Initially training at lower volumes and intensi ties, avoiding the
Valsalv a maneuv er, reducing ranges of motion, and simplifying exercise variants
are some of the ways in which prescription can account for contraindications and
help dev elop confidence in older adul ts (76).
Resistance training takes too much time.
False! Improvement in muscle strength and function can be achiev ed from
exposur es to a minimal dose program (e.g., ≤60 mins/s ession, 2 days/week) (75).
Exercise “snacking, ” defined as multiple short bouts (e.g., <10 mins) of muscle
strengthening exercise, has also been shown to promote adaptations in basic
function in older adul ts (185, 234).
Resistance training requires access to a fitness center.
False! Improvements in both health- and skill-related components of fitness have
been realized by older adults following exposur e to home-based resistance
exercise. Notably , supervised training is preferable; howev er, home-based muscle
strengthening activi ties can pr ovide some f orm of meaningf ul adaptation (32).
Resistance training will make older adults too muscular.
False! Appropriately prescribed resistance training can stimulate gains in muscle
strength without significantly adding muscle bulk. Maintaining or increasing muscle
431
mass, strength, and power are important for performing ADLs and physical
independence.
A resistance training program for older men and women should
vary in volume and intensi ty throughout the year to lessen the
likelihood of overtraining and ensur e that progress is made
throughout the training period. Because recovery from a training
session may take longer in older populations, a training frequency of
two or three sessions per week is recommended, at least during the
initial adaptation period (76, 112). Strength and conditioning
professionals should be sensitive to the concerns of individuals and
be able to modify a training program based on the person’s health
history and individual goals. With competent instruction and support
from friends, older men and women can gain confidence in their
ability to resistance train, which may be enough to ensure good
adher ence to the program. However, since a majori ty of older adults
do not currently engage in resistance training activities (54, 122,
213), professionals may initially need to increase awareness of the
fitness benefi ts associated with resistance exercise, address the
concerns that seniors may have about participating in a resistance
training program, and adapt the exercises and intensi ty to the needs
of the participants.
Safety Recommenda tions for Resistance
Training for Older Adults
Older adult participants should be prescreened, since many older people
suffer from a variety of age-related medical condi tions. If necessary , medica l
advice should be sought concerning the most appr opriate t ype of activi ty.
Participants should warm up for 5 to 10 minutes before each exercise
session. An acceptable warm-up includes low- to moder ate-intensi ty aerobic
activity and cal isthenics.
Older adults should perform static stretching exercises either before or after
—or both bef ore and after —each r esistance tr aining session.
432
Older adults should use a resistance  intensi ty that does not excessiv ely
overload the musculosk eletal system.
Participants should avoid performing the Valsalv a maneuv er during resistance
training to a void an abnormal incr ease in blood pr essure.
Older adults should  be allowed 48 to 72 hours of recovery between exercise
sessions.
They should perf orm al l exercises wi thin a r ange of motion that is pain f ree.
As with any individual engaging with resistance training, older adults should
receive individual ized ex ercise instruction f rom qual ified instructors.
Researchers have reported that social support, acce ss to
qualified fitness professio nals, improving the ability to
complete daily activities, and decreasing the fear and
likelihood of falls are some of the motivators for older
adults consis tently engag ing in resistance and balance
exercise.
An additional consider ation related to resistance training in older
men and women is appropriate nutrition. The quality and quanti ty of
a person’ s food intake (or perhaps selected nutrients) may mean the
difference between losing and gaining muscle mass. It seems that
adequate amou nts of protein are essential for muscle hypertrophy in
older people (126, 151). Furthermor e, inadequate intakes of
macronutrients (fat, protein, and carboh ydrate) and micronutrients
(vitamins and miner als) are associated with potential negativ e health
consequences, including fatigue, compr omised immune function, and
delayed recovery from injury . Improving an older person’ s food
intake not only improves health but may also optimiz e adaptations to
resistance tr aining.
433
Conclusion
Based upon the available resear ch, resistance training can be a safe
and effective method of conditioning for males and females of all
ages and abilities. The potential benefi ts are multifactorial, including
positive effects on a variety of physical performance variables (e.g.,
strength and power), health markers (e.g., body composi tion and
cardiac functio n), and psychosocial development (e.g., self-image,
confidence, well-being). Moreover, regular participation in a
resistance training program can reduce the risk of sport- and
physical activity–related injuries in athletes and nonathletes of all
ages and abilities and promote independent living in seniors. Though
the fundamental principles of resistance training are similar for
people of all ages, there are unique concerns specific to youth and
senior populations. Knowledge of age- and maturity-related
differences is essential to the development and evaluation of safe
and effective resistance training programs. Strength and conditioning
professionals should be aware that individual responses to resistance
exercise may vary greatly and should be sensitive to the individual
needs of al l participants.
Over the past few decades, coaches, clinicians, and exercise
scientists have added to our understanding of age- and maturi ty-
related differences and their implications for resistance  exercise.
Collectively, this work has shown the beneficial effects of resistance
training on individuals of all ages and has provided the foundation
for recommendations about the design of strength and condi tioning
programs. The information in this chapter and other chapters should
help strength and condi tioning professionals understand and
appreciate age- and maturi ty-related differences and enhance their
ability to develop safe and effective resistance training programs for
children, adolescents, and older adul ts alike.
KEY TERMS
434
activities of dai ly living (ADL)
adolescence
adulthood
apoph yseal
athleticism
athletic motor ski ll competencies (AMSC)
biological matur ation
bone miner al densi ty
childhood
chronological age
cocontr action
development
diaph ysis
dynapenia
epiph yseal plate
growth
growth carti lage
long-term athletic dev elopment
matur ation
needs analysis
older
osteopenia
osteopor osis
peak height v elocity (PHV)
preactiv ation
pubert y
resistance ex ercise
sarcopenia
senior
technical competency
training age
young athlete
youth
435
STUDY QUESTIONS
  1.  In reference to biological matur ation, the acronym PHV stands
for which of the f ollowing?
  a.  pediatric height v alue
  b.  peak height v elocity
  c.  partial height v alue
  d.  peak height v alue
  2.  During the developmen tal years, the primary ossification
center where most bone formation occurs is referred to as
which of the f ollowing?
  a.  diaph ysis
  b.  growth plate
  c.  head of the bone
  d.  uniph ysis
  3.  Improvements in muscle strength and power during childhood
are predomina ntly due to adaptations in which system of the
body?
  a.  sk eletal system
  b.  circulatory system
  c.  neur omuscular system
  d.  immune system
4. Which of the following is the progressive and gener alized
skeletal muscle disorder that is associated with an increased
likelihood of adverse outcomes including falls, fractures,
physical disabi lity, and mortal ity in older adul ts?
a. hyperplasia
b. hypertr ophy
c. neuropath y
d. sarcopenia
5. What condi tion is deemed to be present when an individual’ s
bone miner al density is 2.5 standar d deviations (SD) or more
below the a verage of the y oung adul t mean?
436
a. osteoclast
b. osteopenia
c. osteopor osis
d. osteoblast
437