# Section 7.2

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 7: Age-Related Differences and Resistance Training

**Section:** 7.2 -- Older Adults

**PDF Pages:** 411--435

resistance training program will in all likelihood result in some
degree of improvement in sport performance in young athletes (57,
89, 102, 133, 134 , 210).
Potential Risks and Concerns
Appropriately prescribed youth resistance training programs are
relatively safe when compar ed with other sports and activities in
which children and adolescents regularly participate (139, 181).
Paradoxically, it seems that the forces placed on the joints of young
athletes during  sport participation may be far greater, and more
difficult to anticipate, than those gener ated from resistance training
programs (65). The belief that resistance training is danger ous for
children is not consistent with the needs of children and the
documented risks associated with this type of training. Children and
adolescents have been injured in the weight room; howev er, such
injuries are more likely to be accidental (98, 169) and typically occur
in cases in which the levels of supervision and instruction, technical
competency , and training loads are inappr opriate (65). This
highlights the need for strength and condi tioning professionals to
heed safety guidel ines when working with younger populations.
Although epiph yseal plate fractures have been reported in
adolescents who were resistance training, these reports were case
studies and typical ly involved the performance of heavy overhead
lifts in unsupervised settings (97, 203, 207). An epiph yseal plate
fracture has not been reported in any prospectiv e youth resistance
training study that adher ed to establ ished training guidel ines (65).
Of note, 1-repetition maximum (1RM) testing (62, 64, 81) and
maximal isometric assessments in children and adolescents (48, 162,
167) has proven to be safe, provided that appropriate testing
guidel ines are followed (i.e., adequate warm-up periods,  individual
progression of loads, and close supervision of technical
competency). If children and adolescents are taught how to
resistance train properly and understand resistance training
411
guidel ines and procedur es, the risk of an epiph yseal plate fracture is
minimal.
Dispelling  the Myths of Youth Resistance
Training
A wealth of evidence proves children and adolescents can safely and effectively
engage in resistance training to promote improvements in physical fitness, reduce
the risk of sport-related injury , and enhance measur es of health and well-being.
Howev er, there still remain certain  unfounded myths among some health
professionals that ma y deter y outh f rom engaging in r esistance tr aining (67).
Resistance training stunts bone growth.
False! Resistance training stimulates bone remodel ing and strengthens bone,
muscular tissue, and connectiv e tissue during chi ldhood and adolescence.
Resistance training is unsafe for children.
False! With correct technique, appropriate loading, and high-qual ity instruction,
resistance tr aining is a saf e method of tr aining f or all youth.
Resistance training is only for young athletes.
False! Resistance training promotes positive physical and psychosocial adaptations
in all youth, r egardless of whether they participate in competi tive sports.
Children need to wait until puberty to realize the benefits of
resistance training.
False! Resear ch clearly shows that young children can make meaningf ul gains in
physical fitness following resistance training. Children should be psychological ly
matur e enough to understand and f ollow instructions.
Young girls and boys will become “bulky.”
False! Studies have shown that resistance training during childhood stimulates
neuromuscular adaptations. During adolescence, boys will likely increase muscle
mass, but the lower levels of circulating androgens in girls mean they will
experience lower lev els of absolute muscle gr owth.
Program Design Considerations for
Children
It is important to view resistance training as part of a well-rounded
long-term athletic development program for a child that also
addresses other fitness goals (e.g., speed, power , balance,
coordination, endur ance). Although there is no minimal age
412
requirement for participation in a youth resistance training program,
children should have the emotional maturi ty to receive and follow
directions and should want to try this type of activity (139, 215). A
pretraining medical examina tion is not mandatory for appar ently
healthy children; howev er, all participants should be screened for
any injury or illness that may limit or prevent safe participation in a
resistance training program (215). The goals of youth resistance
training programs should not be limited to increasing muscular
strength but should also include teaching children about their
bodies, promoting an interest in physical activity, teaching weight
room etiquet te, and having fun. It seems likely that children who
enjoy participating in physical activities and sport are more likely to
be activ e later in l ife (220).
Two important areas of concern in the development of youth
resistance training programs are the quality of instruction and rate of
progression. Strength and condi tioning professionals must have a
thorough understanding of youth resistance training guidel ines, an
ability and willingness to demonstr ate proper exercise technique,
and the requisi te pedagogical skills to speak with children at a level
they understand (59, 137, 139). Professionals should deemphasiz e
competi tion between participants and focus on proper technique
instead of the amount of weight lifted. Differentiating training
sessions can enable practitioners to meet the needs of individual
children even when delivering sessions to groups of young athletes.
Designing and delivering training programs that pursue a common
goal (i.e., movement skill and muscular strength development) but
have differentiating levels (e.g., technical difficulty, intensity, range
of motion, movement speed) can also be a useful approach to allow
for individual ization based on the athletes’ ability. While some form
of variation needs to be applied to achiev e ongoing adaptation, this
should be applied in a logical and progressive manner , and it is
important to keep the program fresh and challenging. Children
should be given an opportuni ty to develop proper form and
technique, and there should be a balance between repeated
413
opportuni ties to practice and master skills versus introducing new
stimul i to keep sessions f un and engaging.
To optimiz e any training program, practitioners should conduct an
initial assessment of the individual’ s characteristics (i.e., physical,
technical, psychosocial) and the demands of the sport or physical
activity in which he or she participates, commonly known as a
needs analysis . With this information collated, practitioners can
then adopt an appropriate assessment battery on relevant measur es
of physical performance and injury risk, in addition to estimations of
maturi ty status. Similarly, consider ation should be given to the long-
term aspirations of the child prior to finalizing the training program.
Of course, it should be recogniz ed that the level of sophistication
and rigor of the needs analysis and assessment process is context
specific; completing this preliminary work is far easier for a
practitioner working one on one with a small number of children in a
private facility compar ed to another teacher or coach working in a
high school setting that is responsible for the programming of
hundr eds of school- aged children. Regardless of the situation, it is
important to have some understanding of the current training status
of the chi ld to know how to construct the pr ogram.
Although only limited data are available regarding the relationship
between repetitions and selected percentages of the 1RM in
children, it appears that the number of repetitions that can be
performed at a given percentage of the 1RM is specific to the given
exercise (68). Thus, the minimal strength threshold, when expressed
as a percentage of 1RM, may vary between muscle groups, possibly
due to the amount of muscle mass involved with each exercise.
While practitioners have safely used 1RM (62) and isometric mid-
thigh pull testing (160) to determine strength levels in youth within
resear ch settings and sport environments, where this is not possible
(perhaps owing  to time limitations, class size, lack of equipment or
coach expertise), alternativ e means of assessing strength could be
used. Strength and condi tioning professionals can use predictiv e
equations that estimate 1RM loads from multiple submaximal
414
repetitions (e.g., 5RM or 10RM) (139). Howev er, strength and
condi tioning professionals should recogniz e that such approaches
might place the child at heightened risk of injury due to the
cumulativ e fatiguing effects of multiple repetitions on technical form.
In order to obtain a surrogate  measur e of muscular strength without
the use of repetition maximum schemes, practitioners could use
field-based measur es of different jump protocols (e.g., vertical jump
or long jump) or handgrip strength, measur es that have been
significantly correlated to 1RM values in youth (29, 157). Irrespectiv e
of the strength testing protocol used, the child or adolescent must
be able to demonstr ate and maintain correct technical competency
throughout the entire test under the watchful eye of a qualified
professional.
Advanced multijoint exercises such as the snatch and clean and
jerk can be incorpor ated into a child’s program at the appropriate
time (i.e., after foundational strength and technique progressions
have been completed), but the primary focus, especial ly early in a
resistance training program, should be on developing motor skill
competency and muscle strength (168, 194). The athletic motor
skill competencies (AMSC)  have been proposed to represent the
foundational movements that underpin all athletic movements
(figure 7.4; 194). To develop well-rounded athleticism in youth,
practitioners are encour aged to design programs that increase both
form (i.e., technical compete ncy) and function (i.e., force-producing
capabi lities) in each of the AMSC. Practitioners do not necessari ly
need to expose youth to all of the AMSC in each session, but they
should be targeted at various points throughout the training program
(194).
Poor techniqu e can put abnormal stress on musculosk eletal
tissues and lead to injury . The resistance must be lower ed if proper
exercise techn ique cannot be maintained. When learning new
exercises, children should start with an unloaded barbel l, a long
wooden stick, or PVC piping  to learn the correct techn ique. The
importance of correct feedba ck, delivered at the correct time and in
415
the correct manner , cannot be overestimated during this stage of
development to ensur e the facilitation of skill development. Youth
training should involve ongoing grading and evaluation of the
technical performance of different exercises by a trained observ er
(periodical ly from formal assessment but consistently during sessions
via coach observ ations), as opposed to simply assessing
performance measur es (e.g., load lifted or the velocity of movement)
(60). Such an approach can be used to continual ly educate young
athletes about proper exercise technique, raise awareness about
common technical flaws, and provide coaches and teach ers with a
tool for assess ing learning during practice or physical education. A
summary of youth resistance  training guidel ines is presented in the
sidebar .
FIGURE 7.4  The spectrum of athletic motor ski ll competencies (AMSC).
Reprinted by permission from J.M. Radnor, S. Moeskops, S.L Morris, et al., “Developing Athletic Motor Skill
Competencies in Youth,” Strength Conditioning Journal 42, no. 6 (2020): 54-70.
416
Youth Resistance Training Guidelines
Each child should understand the benefi ts and risks associated with
resistance tr aining.
Competent and caring strength and condi tioning professionals should design
and supervise training sessions based primari ly on the desired training
adaptation and technical competency but also with consider ation to growth
and matur ation.
The exercise environment should be safe and free of hazar ds, and the
equipment should be appr opriately siz ed to fi t each chi ld.
Dynamic warm-up exercises, movement challenges, and opportuni ties for
explor atory pla y should be perf ormed bef ore resistance tr aining.
When appropriate, static stretching exercises should be performed after
resistance tr aining.
Carefully moni tor each chi ld’s toler ance to the ex ercise str ess.
Begin wi th light loads to al low appr opriate adjustments to be made.
Increase the resistance gradual ly (e.g., 5%-10%) as technique and strength
improve.
Depending on individual needs and goals, different set × repetition
combinations (e.g., 3 × 5) can be performed on a variety of single- and
multijoint exercises (and those targeting the strengthening of the core
musculatur e).
Advanced multijoint exercises, such as the snatch and clean and jerk, may be
incorpor ated into the program, provided that appropriate loads are used and
technical pr oficiency r emains a k ey outcome.
Two or three nonco nsecutiv e training sessions per week are recommended;
howev er, youth with higher training ages may participate in more frequent
resistance tr aining sessions per week.
When necessary , adult spotters should be nearb y to actively assist the child in
the ev ent of a f ailed repetition (e.g. , bench pr ess or squat).
The resistance training program should be systematical ly periodiz ed
throughout the year to ensur e that the child or adolescent is exposed to a
sequential and varied training stimul us with adequate rest and recovery
between tr aining cy cles.
Adapted from Faigenbaum et al. (2009) and Lloyd et al. (2014)
417
Older Adults
The number of men and women over the age of 65 continues to
rise, and more opportuni ties for participation in sports ranging from
marathon running to weightl ifting are available to older athletes.
While the cardiovascular endur ance and muscular strength of older
competi tors or masters athletes are truly exceptional, even the most
highly trained athletes experience some decline in performance after
age 30 (83, 107). For example, competi tive weightl ifting ability has
been shown to decline with age at a rate of approximately 1% to
1.5% per year until approximately age 70, after which a more
dramatic decrease occurs (152). Older individuals who do not
engage in physical activity typical ly see greater decrements in
several physical performance measur es and increase their risk of
debilitating injury (95, 182). Strength and condi tioning professionals
should understand the physiological changes that occur with aging
and the associated trainabi lity of older individuals. In addition, the
potential health risks associated with physical activity for older
individuals need to be consider ed.
Age-Related Changes in Musc uloskeletal
Health
Significant changes in body composi tion with advancing age can lead
to the development of physical functional impairments and injury .
The well-docum ented loss of bone and muscle with age not only
makes activities of daily life such as getting out of a chair and
opening a window more difficult but also increases the risk for falls,
fractures, and long-term disabi lity (37, 95). Bones become fragile
with age because of a decrease in bone miner al content that causes
an increase in bone porosity. The bone miner al content and
microarchitectur e of bone can deterior ate to such an extent that the
risk of bone fracture, particu larly of the hip, spine, or wrist during a
fall, is increased (2, 76). Osteopenia  is defined by a bone miner al
418
density between −1 and −2.5 standar d deviations (SD) of the young
adult mean, whereas osteo porosis is defined by a bone miner al
density below −2.5 SD of the young adult mean (119). These
condi tions, which result in bones with less density and strength, are
serious concerns for older people (particularly women) because they
heighten the risk of skeletal fracture and poor bone health (2). The
slow but progressive loss of bone with age has been linked to
physical inactivi ty and to hormonal, nutritional, mechanical, and
genetic factors (7, 11). Figure 7.5 shows  the structur al difference
between normal, healthy bone and bone at the stage of
osteopor osis.
FIGURE 7.5 Structur al differences between  (a) normal, healthy bone, and bone at the
stage of  (b) osteopor osis.
© Paul Gunning / Science Source
Advancing age is also associated with a loss of muscle mass,
strength, and function (19, 38). The term sarcopenia  refers to a
progressive and gener alized skeletal muscle disorder that is
associated with an increased likelihood of adverse outcomes
including falls, fractures, physical disabi lity, and mortal ity (42).
Computed tomogr aphy has revealed that after age 30 there is a
decrease in the cross-sectional areas of individual muscles, along
with a decrease in muscle density, reductions in tendon compl iance,
419
and an increase in intramuscular fat (2, 110). These changes seem
to be a predictable consequence of advancing age and seem to be
most pronounced in women (110). The observ ed muscle atrophy
with aging appears to result from physical inactivi ty and a gradual
and selectiv e denerv ation of type II muscle fibers (136, 192, 237).
Decreased muscle mass results in a loss of muscle strength. In one
report, 40% of women aged 55 to 64 years, 45% of women aged 65
to 74 years, and 65% of women aged 75 to 84 years were unable to
lift about 10 pounds (4.5 kg) (115). The reduction in the size and
number and the gradual denerv ation of muscle fibers (100, 192) and
the age-related changes in motor unit morphology and properties
(108, 204) also lead to a decrease in the ability of a muscle to
gener ate power (i.e., exert force rapidly); in fact, power recedes at a
faster rate than muscle strength with aging (79). Since everyday
activities require a certain degree of power production, a decrease in
the ability of muscles to produce force rapidly may adversely affect
the ability of older adults to safely perform activities such as stair
climbing and walking. Factors  that may contribute to the age-related
decline in muscle strength and power include reductions  in muscle
mass, nervous system changes, hormonal changes, poor nutrition,
and physical inactivi ty (16, 112). The functional consequences of
these age-related changes are significant because the magni tude
and rate of change influence the age at which a person may become
functional ly dependent (e.g., unable to perform household tasks or
rise from a chair) or reach a threshold of disabi lity. A summary of
adaptations to aging and resistance training is presente d in table
7.1.
TABLE 7.1  Summary of the Effects of Aging and
Resistance Training
Physical or physiological variable Effect of aging Effect of resistance training
Muscular str ength Decreases Increases
Muscular power Decreases Increases
420
Physical or physiological variable Effect of aging Effect of resistance training
Muscular endur ance Decreases Increases
Muscle mass Decreases Increases
Muscle fiber siz e Decreases Increases
Muscular metabol ic capaci ty Decreases Increases
Resting metabol ic rate Decreases Increases
Body fat Increases Decreases
Bone miner al densi ty Decreases Increases
Physical f unction Decreases Increases
Advancing age is associated with a loss of muscle
power, muscle strength, and muscle mass, which is
largely attrib utable to physical inactivity. A direct result
of these losses is a decrease in functional independence
and an increased risk of falls and fractures.
Age-Related Changes in N euromuscular
Function
Seniors are at an increased risk of falling, which can lead to serious
health, psychosocial, and economic consequences that negativ ely
affect overall quality of life. Specifically, falls can result in pain
syndr omes, joint dislocations, skeletal fractures, limitation s on daily
functional activities, and a reduction in self-confidence (95, 211).
Falls can also lead to permanent disabi lity, institutional ization, and
fatalities (46). Intrinsic factors that lead to increased risk of falls in
seniors include decrements in muscle strength and power (190),
reaction time (2), and impair ed balance and postur al stability (205).
Muscle activity before (preactivation ) and immediately following
(cocontraction ) contact with the ground is an important mediator
of braking and dynamic stabilization in both young and old
individuals. Increased preactiv ation helps increase stiffness of the
421
limb using fast stretch reflexes to better prepare the limb for ground
contact. Cocontr action is a motor control strategy that dynamical ly
stabilizes the joint; howev er, due to the simultaneous activation of
both the agonist and antagonist muscle groups crossing the same
joint, net joint moments and agonistic force outputs are reduced
(236). Resear ch shows that seniors rely on increased levels of
muscle cocontr action as a compensatory mechanism to offset their
increased balance difficulties and to minimiz e postur al sway (171).
Resear ch also highlights that reduced mechanical power output
when walking (especial ly during the push-of f phase) of is one of the
biomechanical aging features of gait (45). Intuitively, this literature
would suggest that older adults should use a variety of training
modes specifically designed to offset these natural reductions in
neuromuscular function. Such methods include low-intensi ty
plyometrics, strength training, balance and dynamic stabilization
exercises, and proprioception training to develop the ability to react
more efficiently wi th the gr ound (92, 95, 189).
Physical activity interv entions can be effective in improving
neuromuscular function and preventing falls in seniors (95, 112,
222). Howev er, simply increasing physical activity will not prevent
falls on its own. Rather, seniors must engage with, and adher e to,
multidimensional, periodiz ed programs that incorpor ate elements of
both resistance and balance training (76, 112, 222). Furthermor e,
current guidel ines suggest that as with any population, training
programs for seniors should overload progressively to promote a
challenging training environment, and that training should be
completed on a frequent basis to provide individuals with a sufficient
training dosag e (76). Of note, resistance training as a stand-alone
training method does not seem to prevent the risk of falls (211), and
balance and flexibi lity training must accompan y resistance training in
order to pr ovide the r equisi te training stimulus to r educe f all risk.
Aerobic exercise should also be featured in a well-balanced
exercise program for older adults, because data indicate that
concurr ent strength and aerobic endur ance training can be delivered
422
together to improve multiple measur es of physical fitness (8).
Notably , maximal aerobic power decreases with age in adults as a
consequence of various physiological changes that accompan y
aging; for exam ple, muscle mass and strength decreased  (130) and
fat mass increases (129), with men showing a more rapid decline
than women (233). On average, when women and men are matched
by age, the aerobic power values of women range from 73% to 85%
of the values of men (229); howev er, the gener al physiological
response to training in later life is equiv ocal between men and
women (4, 183). The differences in aerobic power may be caused by
several factors, including women’s higher percentage of body fat and
lower blood hemoglobin values and men’s larger heart size and
blood volume (24, 34). Notwi thstanding the importance of a varied
training program, the relative importance and potency of resistance
training in increasing muscular strength, muscular power , and bone
miner al density, while counter acting the age-related declines in
contractile function and muscle atrophy, in addition to its many other
health benefi ts for seniors, cannot be o verlook ed (76).
Resistance Training for Older Adults
Aging does not appear to enhance or reduce the ability of the
musculosk eletal system to adapt to resistance exercise, and as a
training mode,  resistance training can be an efficacious tool against
the declines associated with sarcopenia (28). Significant
improvements in muscular strength, muscular power , muscle mass,
bone miner al density, and functional capabi lities (e.g., gait speed)
have been observ ed in older people who participated in progressive
resistance training programs (76, 112, 145). For older adults, such
improvements enhance exercise performance, decrease the risk for
injury , promote independent living, and improve quality of life.
Because of the age-related  changes in musculosk eletal health,
resistance exercise is a beneficial mode of training for older
populations who need to enhance musculosk eletal strength and
power and resist decrements in muscle mass, bone miner al density,
423
and functional abilities. Resistance training can also improve mobility
and enhance physical functioning that enable seniors to perform
activities of daily living (ADL)  and preserv e independence (76).
Furthermor e, data also show that muscular strength is an important
factor for reducing the risk of cardiovascular disease, type 2
diabetes, cancer mortal ity, and al l-cause mortal ity (87, 164).
Resistance training provides a highly effective means of
attenuating physiological changes associated with
aging, impro ving physica l function, and decreasin g the
risk of chronic health conditions.
Responsiveness to Resistance Training in Older
Adults
A great deal of attention has focused on strategies to improve the
musculosk eletal health of older men and women. Because of the
decondi tioned state of many seniors, desirable changes in muscle
strength and function can result from a variety of resistan ce training
protocols, particularly during the first few weeks of training (82).
Previously sedentary older men have more than doubled knee
extensor strength and tripled knee flexor strength following a 12-
week resistance training program (80), and similar observ ations have
been made in older women after 12 weeks of resistance training
(33). In a seminal study, the ability of very old men and women (87-
96 years old) to improve muscular strength was demonstr ated
following only eight weeks of resistance training (73). Meta-
analytical data has indicated  that in a sample of more than 800
seniors aged 75 to 97 years of age, resistance training significantly
increased measur es of muscle strength and increases in whole-
muscle hypertr ophy (94). Meta- analytical data also show that while
sex differences may exist in resistance training adaptations in seniors
when data are consider ed on an absolute basis with males making
larger gains than females, these sex differences are removed, or in
some measur es reversed, when data are interpr eted on a relative
424
scale (117). Collectively, resistance training appears to be an
effective means to mi tigate age-r elated dynapenia  (76).
Improvements in gait speed , stair-climbing ability, balance, and
overall spontaneous activity have also been associated with training-
induced strength gains in older populations (145). Declines in muscle
power are associated with disabi lity and the ability to perform ADL,
particularly in females (112),  and the need to minimiz e age-related
deficits in muscle power is an important part of exercise prescription
for seniors (76, 112). Evidence indicates that resistance training
specific to power development may help optimiz e functional abilities
in older adults (2, 92, 178) and that power training may be as
effective as traditional resistance training in developing muscle
architectur e and neuromuscular activation properties of the lower
limb (230). In some instanc es, it has been suggested that high-
velocity power training has a greater influence on the ability to
produce explosiv e force than traditional progressive resistance
training (92, 191). For example, Fielding and colleagues (74) showed
that older adults who completed high-velocity resistance training
made greater gains in peak power and similar gains in maximum
strength compar ed to seniors  who trained at slower velocities over a
16-week training period. Similar results were reported by Reid and
colleagues (199); in that study, older adults who completed a high-
velocity, high-p ower resistan ce training program made significantly
greater gains in leg press peak power than individuals who followed
a slow-velocity, progressive resistance training program. While the
optimal training protocol for improving muscular strength and power
in seniors is not known, it appears a dose–r esponse relationship
exists between training intensi ty and improvements in muscular
strength and power (44), with higher -intensi ty resistance training
being more effective in developing maximal muscle strength than
moder ate- or low -intensi ty training (9, 214).
Regular participation in a resistance training program also seems
to have profound anabol ic effects in older populations (33, 73, 80).
Computed tomogr aphy and muscle biopsy analysis showe d evidence
425
of muscle hypertr ophy in older men who participated in a high-
intensi ty resistance training program (80), and other investigations
involving older adults have shown that resistance training can
improve nitrogen retention, which can have a positive effect on
muscle protein metabol ism (27, 239). Meta- analytical data have
indicated that resistance training is also an effective treatment to
improve body fat mass and for muscle strength and performance in
seniors diagnosed with sarcopenia (35). Resistance training has also
been shown to have an important effect on energy balance in older
adults, as evidenced by an increase in the resting metabol ic rate of
men and women who resistance train (26). It is noteworth y that
dietary modifications (a change in total food intake or selected
nutrients) in addition to resistance training promotes a greater
hypertr ophic response than resistance training alone in older men
(154).
Although the response of bone to resistance exercise is influenced
by a complex interaction of many variables (e.g., hormo nal status,
activity history , and nutrition), it has been reported that resistance
exercise has a positive effect on bone health in older men and
women (103, 173). Regula rly performed resistance training can
offset the age-related declines in bone health by maintaining or
increasing bone mineral density (BMD). Notably, meta- analytical
data on 1,130 participants  (mean age ~70 yrs) indicate that
progressive resistance training programs stimulated significant
increases in muscle strength and BMD of the femur/hip , with
adaptations in both strength and BMD favoring lower volumes and
higher external loads (173). Furthermor e, a systematic review of 25
studies indicated that while ≥2 sessio ns per week of high-velocity
resistance training can significantly increase BMD, skeletal
adaptations can be lost when resistance training is stopped for >6
months (103). Resear chers have also documented that some
strength, power , and fiber type adaptations in older men are only
partial ly preserv ed after just 12 weeks of detraining; howev er,
strength gains can be recovered following a period of retraining (18).
426
Collectively, these studies show the transient nature of
neuromuscular adaptations and underl ine the importance of viewing
resistance training as a lifelong commi tment. Resistance training
may also reduce the risk of osteopor otic fractures by improving
dynamic balance, muscle mass, and overall level of physical activity
(2). While resistance exercise undoubtedly can improve bone health
in older adults, the interaction of exercise with hormonal and
nutritional factors influences the degree of benefi t of the exercise
program. Furthermor e, bones retain the beneficial effects of exercise
only as long as training is continued. During periods of inactivi ty,
bone densi ty tends to r evert to pr eexercise lev els (111).
Older men and women can make significant
improvements in strength, power, mobility, and
functional ability in response to periodized and
progressive resistance training. Aerobic, resistance, and
balance exercise are all beneficial for older adults, but
only resistance training can increase muscular strength,
muscular power, and muscle mass.
Program Design Considerations for Older Adults
Resistance training is currently recogniz ed as an important
component of a well-rounded  fitness program for older adults (2, 76,
112). Because age-related losses of musculosk eletal strength, power ,
and mass may be almost universal, programs designed to maintain
or improve musculosk eletal health in older adults should be
implemented. Not only can regular participation in a resistance
training program offset some  of these age-related losses, but it can
help older people maintain a more active, higher -quality lifestyle and
promote psy chological and cogni tive well-being (76, 112).
The fundamen tal principles of designing a resistance training
program for an older person and a younger person are basical ly the
same, but strength and condi tioning professionals need to consider
several concerns when working with seniors. Attention should be
427
given to preexisting medical ailments, prior training history , and
nutritional status before the beginning of a resistance training
program that may predispose seniors to increased risk of exercise-
induced injury or illness. Even though older populations retain the
capaci ty to adapt to increased levels of physical activity, safe and
effective exercise guidel ines must be f ollowed.
Before participation in an exercise program, seniors should
complete a medical history and risk factor questionnair e (76).
Potential limitations and possible restrictions for physical activity can
be ascertained from this information. In some cases, physician
clearance is required before the initiation of a moder ate or vigorous
exercise program (76)—f or example, in cardiac rehabilitation
patients or cancer surviv ors. Any questions regarding a participant ’s
medical status (e.g., heart disease, hypertension, arthri tis,
osteopor osis, or diabetes mellitus) should be answer ed by a health
professional. After this information has been obtained, a preprogram
evaluation to document baseline measur ements and assess
responses to specific exercise modal ities should be performed.
Although a treadmi ll exercise test is often used to evaluate
cardiovascular responses to aerobic exercise, a strength test
(preferably on the equipment used in training) should be performed
to assess responses to resistance exercise and aid in the exercise
prescription. Of note, while resistance machines may be used in the
early stages of a training program with older adults due to balance
and flexibi lity limitations, where appropriate, older adults should
sensibly incorpor ate free weight, multijoint resistance training
exercises into the program to provide a greater overall training
stimulus and place a greater demand on postur al stability. Various
methods of assessing muscular strength, including repetition
maximum testing, can be reliably used in senior populations,
provided that appropriate testing guidel ines are followed (76).
Strength and condi tioning professionals should be aware of the
potential risks of breath holding (Valsalv a maneuv er) for older adults
(76). While the Valsalv a mane uver assists in stabilizing the trunk and
428
vertebr al column during performance of various resistance training
exercises, owing to the sudden rise in systol ic and diastol ic blood
pressure that the technique creates, this technique is gener ally
discour aged in seniors (1, 149), especial ly in those individuals with
absolute and relative contraindications (e.g., those with coronary
heart disease, uncontr olled hypertension, musculosk eletal
limitations, and pacemak ers or defibri llators) (76).
Evidence suggests that resistance training can be safe for seniors
when individuals adher e to appropriate training guidel ines (2, 76,
112). On the other hand, poorly designed programs can be
potential ly hazar dous. For example, failing to provide sufficient rest
periods betwee n sets and between different exercises, programming
exercises that are technical ly too challenging, or increasing the
intensi ty of exercise (typical ly the external load against which the
individual is working) all increase the likelihood of resistance
training–r elated injury . Like the situation with youth populations, the
resistance training stimulus should not be increased at the expense
of technical competency f or older adul ts.
Untrained seniors who begin resistance training should start at a
relatively low exercise intensi ty and volume, and the exercise
prescription should be individual ized (76). Notably , meta-analytical
data have indicated that while single sets provided adequate
stimulus for adaptations in upper body strength, multiple sets
produced greater improvements in lower -limb muscle strength and
muscle quality in older adults (148). Although higher intensi ties and
volumes can be tolerated by some older men and women  who have
resistance training experience, the early phase of the training
program should be directed toward emphasizing the benefi ts of
resistance training, addressing individual needs, building confidence,
and learning proper exercise technique while minimizing the
potential for muscle soreness and injury . Less intense training during
the first few weeks of an exercise program may also be beneficial for
seniors who are apprehensiv e about participating in a resistance
training program. Following the initial adaptation period, the training
429
program can gradual ly progress if it continues to meet the needs
and medical concerns of each person. In training older men and
women, it is particularly important to focus on the interaction of
major muscle groups used in everyday activities, such as load
carrying and cl imbing stairs.
During the early stages of a resistance training program
for older adults, investing in education, reducing
anxieties, and building confidence are key outcom es to
promote long-term engagement.
Once participants master the performance of basic resistance
exercises, more advanced and demanding exercises such as standing
postur es with free weights (barbells and dumbbel ls), multidirectional
medicine ball exercises, and advanced balance training (e.g., single-
leg stands and circle turns) can be incorpor ated into the program.
Seniors should  gradual ly progress from 1 set of 8 to 12 repetitions at
a relatively low intensi ty (e.g., 40%-50% 1RM) to higher training
volumes and intensi ties (e.g., 3 sets per exercise with 60%-80% of
1RM), depending on individual needs, goals, and abilities (76, 82).
The current consensus indica tes that for each of the primary muscle
groups, older adults should progress toward 2 or 3 sets of 6 to 12
repetitions of one or two multijoint exercises, working at 70% to
85% of the 1RM, two or three times per week (76). In addition,
high-velocity power exercises can be gradual ly incorpor ated into the
overall training regimen if seniors have successfully completed a
gener al resistance training program. Current recommendations for
increasing power in healthy older adults include the performance of
1 to 3 sets per exercise with a light to moder ate load (40%-60%
1RM) in concentric movements for 6 to 10 repetitions with high
repetition velocity (76). Howev er, plyometrics can also serve as an
effective means to develop high rate-of -force development in various
expressions of the stretch-shortening cycle in older adults when
properly pr ogrammed in supervised set tings (227).
430
Dispelling  the Fears of Resistance Training
for Older Adults
Despi te the publicized benefi ts of resistance exercise for older adults,
misper ceptions remain about the notion of lifting weights. Literature has noted the
phenomenon of a “fear of resistance exercise,” which can lead to older adults
demonstr ating avoidance behavior to resistance exercise due to apprehension,
anxiet y, or a lack of confidence (4). Similarly, a lack of awareness or understa nding
can be a barrier to older adults participating in resistance exercise, which
underl ines the importance of correct education and the promotion of individu alized
approaches (31, 109). To dispel the fears of resistance training, certain  key
messages should be pr omoted to older populations:
Resistance training can cause injury to the musculoskeletal system
in older adults.
False! When programs are technique focuse d, individual ized, and designed and
delivered by appropriately qualified professionals, resistance training is a safe and
effective mode of training for older adults and can promote positive adaptatio ns in
both muscle and bone (76).
Resistance training is not safe for older adults with cardiovascular
or musculoskeletal contraindications.
False! Resistance training  can easily be modified to accommodate for such
contraindications. Initially training at lower volumes and intensi ties, avoiding the
Valsalv a maneuv er, reducing ranges of motion, and simplifying exercise variants
are some of the ways in which prescription can account for contraindications and
help dev elop confidence in older adul ts (76).
Resistance training takes too much time.
False! Improvement in muscle strength and function can be achiev ed from
exposur es to a minimal dose program (e.g., ≤60 mins/s ession, 2 days/week) (75).
Exercise “snacking, ” defined as multiple short bouts (e.g., <10 mins) of muscle
strengthening exercise, has also been shown to promote adaptations in basic
function in older adul ts (185, 234).
Resistance training requires access to a fitness center.
False! Improvements in both health- and skill-related components of fitness have
been realized by older adults following exposur e to home-based resistance
exercise. Notably , supervised training is preferable; howev er, home-based muscle
strengthening activi ties can pr ovide some f orm of meaningf ul adaptation (32).
Resistance training will make older adults too muscular.
False! Appropriately prescribed resistance training can stimulate gains in muscle
strength without significantly adding muscle bulk. Maintaining or increasing muscle
431
mass, strength, and power are important for performing ADLs and physical
independence.
A resistance training program for older men and women should
vary in volume and intensi ty throughout the year to lessen the
likelihood of overtraining and ensur e that progress is made
throughout the training period. Because recovery from a training
session may take longer in older populations, a training frequency of
two or three sessions per week is recommended, at least during the
initial adaptation period (76, 112). Strength and conditioning
professionals should be sensitive to the concerns of individuals and
be able to modify a training program based on the person’s health
history and individual goals. With competent instruction and support
from friends, older men and women can gain confidence in their
ability to resistance train, which may be enough to ensure good
adher ence to the program. However, since a majori ty of older adults
do not currently engage in resistance training activities (54, 122,
213), professionals may initially need to increase awareness of the
fitness benefi ts associated with resistance exercise, address the
concerns that seniors may have about participating in a resistance
training program, and adapt the exercises and intensi ty to the needs
of the participants.
Safety Recommenda tions for Resistance
Training for Older Adults
Older adult participants should be prescreened, since many older people
suffer from a variety of age-related medical condi tions. If necessary , medica l
advice should be sought concerning the most appr opriate t ype of activi ty.
Participants should warm up for 5 to 10 minutes before each exercise
session. An acceptable warm-up includes low- to moder ate-intensi ty aerobic
activity and cal isthenics.
Older adults should perform static stretching exercises either before or after
—or both bef ore and after —each r esistance tr aining session.
432
Older adults should use a resistance  intensi ty that does not excessiv ely
overload the musculosk eletal system.
Participants should avoid performing the Valsalv a maneuv er during resistance
training to a void an abnormal incr ease in blood pr essure.
Older adults should  be allowed 48 to 72 hours of recovery between exercise
sessions.
They should perf orm al l exercises wi thin a r ange of motion that is pain f ree.
As with any individual engaging with resistance training, older adults should
receive individual ized ex ercise instruction f rom qual ified instructors.
Researchers have reported that social support, acce ss to
qualified fitness professio nals, improving the ability to
complete daily activities, and decreasing the fear and
likelihood of falls are some of the motivators for older
adults consis tently engag ing in resistance and balance
exercise.
An additional consider ation related to resistance training in older
men and women is appropriate nutrition. The quality and quanti ty of
a person’ s food intake (or perhaps selected nutrients) may mean the
difference between losing and gaining muscle mass. It seems that
adequate amou nts of protein are essential for muscle hypertrophy in
older people (126, 151). Furthermor e, inadequate intakes of
macronutrients (fat, protein, and carboh ydrate) and micronutrients
(vitamins and miner als) are associated with potential negativ e health
consequences, including fatigue, compr omised immune function, and
delayed recovery from injury . Improving an older person’ s food
intake not only improves health but may also optimiz e adaptations to
resistance tr aining.
433
Conclusion
Based upon the available resear ch, resistance training can be a safe
and effective method of conditioning for males and females of all
ages and abilities. The potential benefi ts are multifactorial, including
positive effects on a variety of physical performance variables (e.g.,
strength and power), health markers (e.g., body composi tion and
cardiac functio n), and psychosocial development (e.g., self-image,
confidence, well-being). Moreover, regular participation in a
resistance training program can reduce the risk of sport- and
physical activity–related injuries in athletes and nonathletes of all
ages and abilities and promote independent living in seniors. Though
the fundamental principles of resistance training are similar for
people of all ages, there are unique concerns specific to youth and
senior populations. Knowledge of age- and maturity-related
differences is essential to the development and evaluation of safe
and effective resistance training programs. Strength and conditioning
professionals should be aware that individual responses to resistance
exercise may vary greatly and should be sensitive to the individual
needs of al l participants.
Over the past few decades, coaches, clinicians, and exercise
scientists have added to our understanding of age- and maturi ty-
related differences and their implications for resistance  exercise.
Collectively, this work has shown the beneficial effects of resistance
training on individuals of all ages and has provided the foundation
for recommendations about the design of strength and condi tioning
programs. The information in this chapter and other chapters should
help strength and condi tioning professionals understand and
appreciate age- and maturi ty-related differences and enhance their
ability to develop safe and effective resistance training programs for
children, adolescents, and older adul ts alike.
KEY TERMS
434
activities of dai ly living (ADL)
adolescence
adulthood
apoph yseal
athleticism
athletic motor ski ll competencies (AMSC)
biological matur ation
bone miner al densi ty
childhood
chronological age
cocontr action
development
diaph ysis
dynapenia
epiph yseal plate
growth
growth carti lage
long-term athletic dev elopment
matur ation
needs analysis
older
osteopenia
osteopor osis
peak height v elocity (PHV)
preactiv ation
pubert y
resistance ex ercise
sarcopenia
senior
technical competency
training age
young athlete
youth
435