# Section 8.1

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 8: Sex-Related Differences and Resistance Training

**Section:** 8.1 -- Implications of Resistance Training for Females

**PDF Pages:** 438--448

CHAPTER  8
SEX-RELATED DIFFERENCES
AND THEIR IMPLICATIONS
FOR RESISTANCE TRAINING
N. Travis Triplett, PhD, and Nicole Dabbs, PhD
After completing this chapter, you will be able to
discuss sex -related di fferences in ph ysical char acteristics and
muscular f unction and the impl ications f or resistance tr aining in
females;
recogniz e common injuries and condi tions in f emales;
discuss r esponses and adaptations to r esistance tr aining in
females; and
understand r esistance tr aining r ecommendations f or females.
Strength and condi tioning professionals need to understand sex-
related differences in physical characteristics, body composi tion, and
physiological responses to resistance exercise when designing and
evaluating resistance training programs for females. An
understanding of these differences and the areas of concern that are
unique to female athletes can help to optimiz e performance and
decrease the risk of sport -related injuries.
438
Implications of Resistance Training for
Females
Females who regularly participate in resistance training activities can
improve their health, reduce their risk of degener ative diseases (e.g.,
osteopor osis) and their injury rates, and enhance their overall
sporting performance. Whereas in the past females may have
questioned the value of resistance training or even avoided this type
of exercise due to social stigma, evidence clearly indicates that
females are capable of tolerating and adapting to the stresses of
resistance exercise and that the benefi ts are substantial (93).
Furthermor e, to enhance health and fitness and reduce injury rates,
it is now suggested that resistance training be an essential
component of any exercise or training program that females follow
(127, 128, 167).
Physical Changes in Early Adulthood
While differences in growth and development between boys and girls
are covered in chapter 7, a few physical developme ntal changes
continue into early adulthood. On average, females matur e earlier
than males (105), and most measur es of female growth and
matur ation are complete by around age 18. Some exceptions include
the growth plates, which typical ly close by the age of 20, and peak
bone density (around age 30) (105). Howev er, neither of these are
undev eloped enough to result in a higher risk of injury from training,
including activities such as high-intensi ty or high-load plyometrics (2,
122). The brain also continues to develop throughout the 20s, but
most of this growth is in the frontal lobe, which controls decision-
making, while the motor -related brain areas are already
developmental ly complete (2). The aspects of brain functio n that can
continue to improve into the early 30s include visual-per ceptual
skills. Reactiv e agility training (see chapter 20) is a type of training
that can improve these visual-per ceptual skills (2). The additional
439
benefi ts beyond improvements in athletic performance due to
improved reaction time and cogni tive processing include a reduction
in the risk of f alls later in l ife (2).
During pubert y the production of estrogen  in girls increases fat
deposi tion and breast development, whereas testosterone
production in boys increases bone formation and protein synthesis.
Though estrogen also stimulates bone growth, boys have a longer
growth period and commence  pubert y at a later stage, and therefore
adult men tend to achiev e greater overall statur e than adult women
(2). On average, adult females tend to have more body fat, less
muscle, and lower bone miner al density than adult males.
Furthermor e, females tend to be lighter in total body weight than
males. Anthr opometric measur ements of adults indicate that males
tend to have broader should ers relative to their hips and females
tend to have broader hips relative to their waist and shoulders. The
broader shoulders in males can support more muscle tissue and can
also provide a mechanical advantage for muscles acting at the
shoulder . Although some female athletes have lower fat percentages
than untrained males, extremely low body fat percentages in
females may be associated with adverse health consequences (124,
125).
Maintaining skeletal muscle mass and bone miner al density is
important for both athletic performance and health. Without a
sustained resistance training program, muscle mass and bone
density begin a pattern of decline in the mid-30s, which can
accelerate after approximately age 50, especial ly when accompanied
by menopause (120, 152). Therefore, females should be encour aged
to participate in long-term resistance training programs to counter act
the skeletal and muscular changes that will otherwise occur with
aging. Another benefi t of maintaining or increasing muscle mass
aside from athletic performance is the extension of the time females
can engage in sport and reduce their risk of injury (154), as well as
maintaining the ability to perform activities of daily living and
independence into old age (18, 121, 182).
440
A key focus of any resis tance training program for a
female should be to maintain muscle mass and bone
mineral density, both of which are important for athletic
performance and overall health.
Pregnancy
Pregnancy  occurs only when pubertal sexual development is
complete and prior to menopause (average age between 12-51
years). There are significant and specific physiological and
anatomical changes that occur during each of the trimesters of
pregnancy and postpartum periods, which can affect physical
training and perf ormance ( table 8.1 ).
Multiple professional organizations have recommendat ions for
physical activity and exercise during pregnancy (20, 21, 26, 123,
188). All of the published guidelines promote exercise as a minimal-
risk activity that has benefi ts for most females during pregnancy ,
with some modifications to programming and specific exercises
required as pregnancy progresses due to normal anatomic and
physiologic changes that occur. These guidel ines are presented in
table 8.2 .
For pregnant females, program design variables (exercise
selection, frequency, intensi ty, and duration) should be based on the
baseline level of fitness of the athlete immediately prior to the
confirmation of pregnancy . Resistance training at a moder ate
intensi ty during pregnancy has many benefi ts including improved
blood sugar levels and improved insulin usage, as well as improved
feelings of energy and reduction of fatigue (181). Studies on elite
athletes have shown that they are able to manage a variety of
training loads and intensi ties and still deliver healthy babies and
return to their sport (168); howev er, most of the resear ch is on more
moder ate loads. Vigorous-intensi ty exercise, including high-intensi ty
interv al training, is tolerated well among females with healthy
pregnancies and who previously engaged in vigorous training, but
441
caution is elicited in exceeding 90% of maximum heart rate until
more resear ch is perf ormed (13, 169).
Pregnancy is a unique condition with specific challenges
to resistance training program design. An awareness of
the normal physiological  changes during pregnan cy is
very important to being able to design a safe, effective,
and individualized resistance training program for a
pregnant female.
TABLE 8.1  Physiological and Anatomical Changes in
Pregnancy
Trimester Cardiorespiratory Musculoskeletal Metabolic
First Increased car diac output
by 20%
Decrease in peripher al
vascular r esistance
Increase in blood v olume
Increased tidal v olume
Increase in minute
ventilation (40%-50%) and
V̇O2maxWeight gain and
increased f orces on
joints
Increase in l igament
laxity
Changes in micr o-
architectur e of bone
but not o verall bone
massIncrease in
metabol ic
rate
Increase in
body
temper ature
Second (in
addition to
prior
trimesters)Increased car diac output
by 40%
Decrease in peripher al
vascular r esistance b y
25%-30%
Increase in blood v olume,
with steady f all in
hemoglobin
Fluid r etention and edema
Supine posi tions decr ease
venous r eturn to heart,
which decr eases str oke
volume and car diac outputChanges in center of
gravity
Increase in loss of
balance
Sources: (86a, 89b , 96a, 162a, 186a, 187a)
442
Trimester Cardiorespiratory Musculoskeletal Metabolic
Third (in
addition to
prior
trimesters)Slight decr ease in car diac
output at term wi th stroke
volume decr easing and
heart r ate incr easing
Peripher al vascular
resistance begins to
increase f rom 32 weeks
Blood v olume incr eases
50% of pr epregnancy
levels wi th a 50% incr ease
in plasma v olume b y 34
weeksIncrease in lumbar
lordosis
Increase in f oot siz e
Increase in
compr ession
neuropathies
10 weeks
postpartumMost car diovascular and
respiratory changes r eturn
to prepregnancy lev els
within the first 1-2 weeks
after del iveryPelvic floor
dysfunction
Urinary incontinence
Increase in l igament
laxity (ma y persist
up to 5 months after
delivery)
Sources: (86a, 89b , 96a, 162a, 186a, 187a)
TABLE 8.2  General Exercise Recommendations and
Associated Signs and Symptoms of Exercising During
Pregnancy
TrimesterExercise recommendations and exercise-related signs and
symptoms
First Continue activi ty at pr epregnancy lev els and intensi ties but
monitor for adv erse signs and symptoms.
Misinterpr etation of maximum heart r ate, r eaching i t sooner in
pregnancy . Use combined appr oach of heart r ate and per ceived
exertion to moni tor intensi ty.
Initiate pelvic floor ex ercises to assist in labor and del ivery and
help wi th urinary incontinence.
Increase squat ting activi ties wi th body weight and loaded to
maintain str ength and impr ove labor and del ivery.
Increase w ater intak e.
Sources: (86a, 89b , 96a, 162a, 186a, 187a)
443
TrimesterExercise recommendations and exercise-related signs and
symptoms
Second (in addi tion
to prior trimesters)Avoid supine posi tions and ex ercises; swi tch to incl ine, side-
lying, or v ertical posi tions.
Continue pelvic floor ex ercises to assist in labor and del ivery and
help wi th urinary incontinence.
Third (in addi tion to
prior trimesters)Modify activi ty based on signs, symptoms, and maternal comf ort.
Continue to moni tor for adv erse signs and symptoms.
Avoid supine posi tions and ex ercises; swi tch to incl ine, side-
lying, or v ertical posi tions.
Modify activi ties to decr ease discomf ort or symptoms of
neuropath y.
10 weeks
postpartumPelvic floor ex ercises (i.e. , Kegel ex ercises) immediately after
delivery for at least 12-24 weeks.
Core stabi lization ex ercises immediately after del ivery for at least
12-24 weeks.
Gradual r eturn to ph ysical activi ty and sport -related activi ties.
Increase w ater intak e.
With Cesar ean del iveries, mor e time ma y be needed to r estore
abdominal muscles to pr epregnancy str ength and stabi lization.
Sources: (86a, 89b , 96a, 162a, 186a, 187a)
Injury and Health Considerations in
Female Athletes
Female athletes face higher risks of specific injuries and health
concerns than male athletes, possibly due to anatomical and
biomechanical differences. Strength and condi tioning professionals
should emphas ize lower extremity biomechanics and proper exercise
techniques to address injury risk. Female athletes also experience
higher rates of sport-related concussions, and mental health
concerns can be notable. Sleep depriv ation heightens their risk for
injury and impairs recovery; thus, sleep education is essential.
Additional ly, pelvic floor dysfunction, especial ly urinary incontinence,
affects female athletes at a higher rate, often affecting their activity
level and risk of injury .
444
Anterior Cruciate Ligament
It is importan t for strength and condi tioning professionals to be
aware of anterior cruciate ligament (ACL)  injuries in female
athletes, particularly in sports such as soccer, lacrosse, and
basketball (3, 4). According to a number of reports, ACL injuries
occur in greater absolute frequencies in males (122), but in
compar able sports f emale athletes’ r elative rate of ACL injuries is two
times higher than those reported for male athletes (3, 4, 78, 86,
114). Although  it is possible that the increasing absolute number of
knee injuries simply reflects an increase in participation by females
in organized sport, others have suggested causativ e factors. It is
possible that the high muscu lar resistance and knee torque during
high-load landing and rapid change-of -direction movements may
cause microdamage or strain on the ACL over time, increasing the
risk for injury for all athlete s (12, 187). Howev er, female athletes
may have other factors contributing to an increase in the rate of ACL
injury , such as anatomical, biomechanical, and external f actors.
Anatomical factors, such as femoral notch size reducing tensile
strength, greater tibial slope increasing strain, and ligament laxity
(45, 74, 98, 163), may contribute to heightened ACL injury risk in
females. Howev er, it is believed that the most significant contributing
factor is a neuromuscular deficiency , which ultimately leads to
abnormal biomechanics such as increased dynamic knee valgus upon
contact with the ground (128). Therefore, sociocul tural factors such
as motor development experience, training opportuni ties and
resour ces, gender ed development, and sex inequal ity in sporting
opportuni ties (27, 130, 142) should be examined as causal for the
higher ACL injury risk f or female athletes.
Evidence suggests that in order to reduce the risk of ACL injury ,
youth should participate in preparatory condi tioning before pubert y
to optimiz e training adaptati ons (128) and continue across the life
span. Many ACL injuries in female athletes occur from noncontact
mechanisms (e.g., deceler ation, lateral pivoting or landing) (4, 23),
which makes engaging in progressive overload training, plyometrics,
445
agility, and balance training  that is designed and delivered by a
strength and condi tioning professional critical to reducing the risk of
ACL injuries (6, 51, 79, 183). Additional clinical trials are needed to
determine the best method for reducing the incidence of ACL injuries
in female athletes and improving adher ence to these training
protocols.
Patellofemoral Pain Syndrome
Patellofemoral pain syndrome (PFPS)  is a broad term used for
pain arising from the patellofemoral joint, also known as runner ’s
knee or jumper ’s knee (24). Female athletes are more than two
times more likely to have incidences of PFPS compar ed to male
athletes (25). PFPS has been shown to be attributed to the hip
mechanics in female athletes before pubert y, and modified
mechanics in the knee may be related to PFPS throughout
development in female athletes (60). Strength and condi tioning
professionals should focus on lower extremity biomechanic s, exercise
technique, imbalances, and weaknesses with any athlete
experiencing PFPS to improve outcomes. The Nation al Athletic
Trainers’ Association has a position statement that provides guidance
to practitioners  on how to manage patellofemoral pain in athletes,
including use of br acing, taping, or other modi fications (24).
Bone Stress Injuries
Bone stress injuries , includ ing stress fractures, have regularly
been shown to occur at a higher rate in female athletes than in male
athletes (34, 153). The accumulation of repetitive stress, bone stress
injuries frequently occur in athletes (1, 153) and are consider ed
overuse injuries, where abnormal bone remodel ing occurs (180).
Strength and condi tioning professionals should continue to monitor
workload, and though it is challenging to identi fy individual bone
stress tolerance, it is possible to gener ally monitor bone health and
symptoms of relative energy deficiency in sport (RED-S)  (124).
(See chapter 11 for more information on RED-S.) Additional ly, other
446
risk factors could be identi fied through a screening process for bone
stress injuries, such as vitamin D levels and early sport special ization
(1, 180). Continuing to prescribe exercises that are osteogenical ly
stimulating and alerting workload through periodization may assist in
reducing bone str ess injuries f or female athletes.
Concussions
A concussion , or mild traumatic brain injury , is an impact to the
head or body that causes the brain to move rapidly back and forth in
the skull, which disrupts normal brain function (73). Female athletes
are at an increased incidence of sport-related concussion s in some
sports (soccer, basketball, softbal l), with hockey having the highest
incidence of concussions compar ed to male athletes in similar sports
(35, 41, 133). Female athletes have been shown to have twice the
rate of contact with equipm ent and surfaces compar ed to male
athletes. Howev er, player-to-pla yer contact has been shown to be
similar in both female and male athletes for causing concussions (32,
97). Other factors, such as biomechanical and hormonal differences,
may lead to a greater susceptibi lity of concussions in female athletes
(109, 151, 161). Female athletes experience longer recovery time
with prolonged symptoms after a concussion compar ed to male
athletes (32, 41, 109, 161). When multiple concussions occur, female
athletes experience lower cerebral blood flow (70) and greater
changes between single- and dual-task gait activities compar ed to a
single concussiv e event (81).
Concussion management, prevention, and return-to-pla y
programs should consider the sex differences in injury mechanics.
Howev er, due to a lack of female athlete–speci fic resear ch in
concussion management programs, there should be an individual ized
approach for concussion management and return to play based on
clinical presentation, regardless of sex (109, 151). The American
Medical Assoc iation for Sports Medicine position statement on
concussion in sport can guide practitioners on the clinical diagnosis,
assessment, and management in athletic populations (73).
447
How Can Female Athletes Reduce Their
Injury Risk?
To help female athletes reduce their injury risk, strength and condi tioning
professionals should do the f ollowing:
Recommend preparticipation screening by a sports medicine physician. This
should include identi fication of risk factors for injury along with
musculosk eletal testing.
Encour age female athletes to participate in a year-round condi tioning
program that includes resistance, plyometric, speed and agility, and flexibi lity
training. The condi tioning program should meet the specific needs of each
athlete and should progress in a periodiz ed fashion that allows for training
adaptations to continual ly mani fest.
Ensur e that females learn, and can repeatedly demonstr ate, correct
movement mechani cs (e.g., jumping, landing, twisting, and cutting) within a
variety of en vironments.
Precede every exercise session with a gener al dynamic warm-up and a
specific warm-up using movements that resemble those involved in the
activity and that target the activation of key muscle groups (e.g., posterior
chain muscle gr oups).
Provide augmented feedback within training sessions to optimiz e skill transfer
and enhance biomechanics r elated to injury .
Mental Health
Mental health  has gained increasingly more attention in athletes
with a focus on sport organizations and practitioners to take a
holistic approach when training athletes (33, 57, 77, 149). Athletes
are exposed to additional mental health risk factors (77, 149), and
female athletes in particular  are at higher risk for certain mental
health symptoms and prevalence compar ed to male athletes (5,
179). Resear ch suggests that female athletes may have poor mental
health outcom es due to an increased risk of certain disorders (e.g.,
burnout, eating  disorders, disordered eating, anxiet y, depression) (5,
75, 144, 149) and are subjected to increased appear ance-based
pressure (8, 144), discrimination, and financial strain than male
athletes (179).
448