# Section 8.3

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 8: Sex-Related Differences and Resistance Training

**Section:** 8.3 -- Resistance Training Considerations

**PDF Pages:** 459--464

Resistance Training Considerations
With resistance  training, the primary goal is to improve strength and
power . When comparing training-induced changes in muscular
strength between sexes, it is important to distinguish between
absolute and relative measur es. Sex-related differences in
hypertr ophy and muscle mass (106, 132, 143) indicate that absolute
muscle strength in females is lower than in males (108, 117),
whereas males’ greater absolute strength is primari ly achiev ed by
larger muscle fiber size (117, 146, 160). The absolute lower body
strength of females is gener ally closer to male values compar ed to
the absolute values for upper body strength (10, 82, 84, 117). Sex-
related differences in body composi tion, anthropometric
characteristics, and distribution of fat-free mass can partly explain
these sex-related differences, which are appar ent in recreational ly
trained individuals as wel l as highly tr ained athletes (14).
When consider ed on a relative basis, sex-related differences in
muscular strength are greatly reduced. Females have similar number
of muscle fibers as males, and strength is similar when normal ized to
muscle volume (113, 117). Differences in hypertr ophy between
males and females may be due to a variety of factors such as
endocrine and genetics because they relate to regulating muscle
mass (184), whereas factors such as muscle cross-sectiona l area and
enzyme activity may contribute to strength and performance
differences (85, 131, 162). Because the average male and female
differ consider ably in body size, it is useful to compar e sex
differences in strength relative to body weight, fat-free mass, and
muscle cross-sectional area (14, 31). When expressed relative to
body weight, the lower body strength of females is similar to that of
males, while the upper body strength of females is still somewhat
less (10, 82, 84, 117). If comparisons are made relative to fat-free
mass, differences in strength  between males and females tend to
disappear (10, 82, 84 , 117).
459
Sex-related differences in power output are similar to those for
muscular strength. Measur ements comparing power outputs of
female athletes relative to lean body mass were reported to be
similar for lower body power and still presented differences for upper
body power when compar ed to male athletes (10, 61). Although the
data are equiv ocal, sex-related differences in the rate of force
development (147, 148) and the recruitment differences in muscle
activation where females express lower levels of type IIa fibers’
percent of myosin heavy chain isoform content (138, 139) could
partly explain these findings.
During progressive overload and targeted training, female athletes
experience substantial power and strength increases similar to male
athletes (64). In a recent study, maximal strength and vertical jump
height were increased in collegiate volleybal l players by using a
combination of traditional resistance training exercises and
weightl ifting variations at various loads in addition to volleybal l
practice, over the course of about 2.5 years of training (88). Other
resear ch supports plyometrics in female basketball players and other
velocity-based resistance training in cyclists to improve strength,
power , and muscle hypertr ophy (36, 119). It has also been reported
that adding heavy strength training to a female athlete’ s endur ance
training increased muscle strength, performance, and size without
affecting endur ance running perf ormance or running econom y (176).
Several studies have investigated menstrual cycle phase and
exercise performance, with some effects indicating that the phase of
cycle has an effect on performance in eumenorrheic females (111).
Additional research shows that in naturally cycling females, there are
minimal differences in strength measur es between phases (19). The
practical relevance of phase-based training comes into question of
whether it is feasible to track female athletes’ cycles when
considering the variety of hormonal contraceptiv es they may be
using or menstrual cycle irregulari ties, especial ly in team-based
sports in which the number of athletes is high.
460
The most recent evidence on menstrual cycle and performance
from meta-analyses did not conclude any systematic relationship
between performance and menstrual cycle phase in trained female
athletes (38, 50, 111, 112). Other consider ations are necessary to
consider , such as varying menstrual cycle symptoms among female
athletes and the effect on their sleep and recovery during all stages
of the menstrual cycle (110). Consequently , the current evidence
does not support modifying prescription of resistance training based
on a f emale athlete’ s menstrual cy cle phase.
461
Conclusion
Evidence indicates that resistance exercise can be a safe and
effective method of training  for female athletes of all ages and
abilities. The potential benef its are multifactorial, includi ng positive
effects on a variety of physical performance variables (e.g., strength
and power), health markers (e.g., body composi tion and cardiac
function), and psychosocial development (e.g., self-image and
confidence). Moreover, regular participation in resistance training
programs can better prepare female athletes to increase
performance and decrease risk of injury . Though the fundamental
principles of resistance training are similar for people of both sexes,
there are unique conside rations specific to female  athletes.
Knowledge of sex-related differences is essential to the development
and evaluation of safe and effective resistance training programs.
Strength and condi tioning professionals should be aware that
individual responses to resistance exercise may vary greatly
independent of sex and should be sensitive to the individual needs
of all participants.
Over the past few decades, coaches, clinicians, and exercise
scientists have added to our understanding of sex-related differences
and their implications for resistance exercise. Their work has
quanti fied the impact of resistance training on female athletes and
has provided the foundation for recommendations about the design
of strength and condi tioning programs. The information in this
chapter and other chapters should help strength and condi tioning
professionals understand and appreciate sex-related differences and
enhance their ability to develop safe and effective resistance training
programs f or females.
KEY TERMS
anterior cruciate l igament (ACL)
bone str ess injuries
462
concussion
cortisol
endocrine system
estradiol
estrogen
growth f actor
growth hormones (GH)
menstrual cy cle
mental heal th
osteogenesis
patellofemoral pain syndr ome (PFPS)
pelvic floor dysf unction (PFD)
pregnancy
progester one
relative ener gy deficiency in sport (RED- S)
stress urinary incontinence (SUI)
testoster one
urinary incontinence (UI)
STUDY QUESTIONS
  1.  Which of the following is not one of the physical changes
related to growth and development that occur well into
adulthood and may affect resistance training and condi tioning
in females?
  a.  incr eased bone miner al densi ty
  b.  closur e of gr owth plates
  c.  impr oved visual-per ceptual ski lls
  d.  incr eased muscle mass
  2.  Which of the following musculosk eletal changes occurs with
pregnancy and can af fect resistance tr aining pr ogramming?
  a.  incr eased body temper ature
  b.  decr eased car diac output
  c.  incr eased l igament laxi ty
463
  d.  decr eased v enous r eturn in supine posi tions
  3.  Estr adiol, one of the main hormones in the menstrual cycle,
has which of the f ollowing ef fects in the body?
  a.  pr omotes muscle pr otein synthesis and r educes muscle
protein degr adation
  b.  incr eases the amount of muscle damage wi th training
  c.  negativ ely influences the contr actile properties of muscle
  d.  incr eases postex ercise muscle cel l membr ane disruption
  4.  When a female athlete has multiple concussions, which of the
following does she not experience?
  a.  lower cer ebral blood flow
  b.  fewer changes between single-task gai t activi ties
  c.  gr eater changes between single-task gai t activi ties
  d.  gr eater changes between dual-task gai t activi ties
  5.  When creating a program for a female athlete, which of the
following is the most important to consider?
  a.  individual ization
  b.  sex di fferences
  c.  sport di fferences
  d.  gener alization b y sport
464