# Section 8.2

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 8: Sex-Related Differences and Resistance Training

**Section:** 8.2 -- Training Responses and Adaptations

**PDF Pages:** 449--458

Resear ch also suggests that elite female athletes are twice as
likely to self-report symptoms  of depression than male athletes (63),
which may inhibi t health and performance. In 2021, 40% of
collegiate female athletes reported experiencing overwhelming
anxiet y compar ed to 22% in col legiate male athletes (189).
Early detection of mental health issues is critical, and
strength and conditioning practitioners should
understand symptoms and how these issues arise and
should promo te and provide environments that support
an athlete’s mental health, prevention, and treatment
team and strategies of mental health disorders.
Sleep
A majori ty of athletes receive less-than- age-appropriate sleep levels,
and a loss in sleep for athletes is a known risk factor for increased
injury risk (15, 16, 157). Female collegiate athletes may be
particularly likely to have low sleep durations that are consistent with
sleep depriv ation (<7 h/night), in association with daytime
sleepiness and dysfunction (30, 69). Sleep quanti ty (113, 116) and
quality have been shown to be lower after training and competi tion
in female athletes (134, 136). Education on sleep hygiene for
athletes, coaches, and support practitioners has been shown to
address some barriers preventing good sleep quality and thus has
been shown to improve sleep in athletes (115, 135). Improving sleep
quality and quanti ty is cri tical f or optimal r ecovery (178).
Pelvic Floor Dysfunction
Pelvic floor dysfunction (PFD) is a term used to identi fy various
impairments of the pelvic floor muscles that support  the pelvic
organs and promote continence (99, 107). The most common PFDs
are urinary incontinence (UI) and stress urinary incontinence
(SUI)  among several others (7, 42, 107). UI is an involuntary loss of
urine, and SUI is an involuntary loss of urine with any physical
449
exertion (22, 150). It has been reported that UI in female athletes
occurs 5 times more compar ed to male athletes, and 2.7 times more
compar ed to sedentary females (42, 150, 164, 172). Female athletes
have an overall 27% prevalence of UI compar ed to male athletes,
and a 36% prevalence of UI compar ed to sedentary females (42,
150, 164, 172). Participating in sport has been reported to be one of
the main causes of UI in female athletes, with high-impac t and high-
loading sports incr easing incidence of SUI.
UI may be due to the imbalance of contraction strength  and an
increase in abdominal pressure that results in deformat ion of the
connectiv e tissue (99, 107). Programs should include prevention,
lifestyle modifications, pelvic  floor strengthening, biofeedback, and
pharmacological interv ention s. Female athletes should be taught
how to properly engage their pelvic floor muscles and abdominal
wall muscles, and in some cases may need to see a physical
therapist that special izes in PFD. With proper education and pelvic
floor tr eatment, f emales can r ecover from UI (46, 55).
How Can Females Improve Their Health
Outcomes?
To help females improve their health outcomes, strength and condi tioning
professionals should do the f ollowing:
Recommend workin g with appropriate medical staff to provide resour ces and
services as needed when they have identi fied signs and symptoms of
concerns that incr ease risk of heal th issues
Encour age females to seek services from a mental health provider when
initial symptoms of mental heal th disor ders arise
Educate females on the appropriate amount and quality of sleep needed and
the important role it plays in the body’s recovery and for decreasing risk of
injury
Provide information to females about the variety of impairments that can
occur in the pelvic floor and encour age females to seek a special ized physical
therapist in PFD when signs and symptoms oc cur
450
Training Responses and Adaptations
Before resista nce training programs can be properly designed,
understanding the physiological responses to a resistan ce training
session and adaptations to regularly performing a resistance training
program are critical. The main body systems involved are the
musculosk eletal, metabol ic, and endocrine systems, which have
varying levels of response and adaptation differences between males
and females. These differences can affect how programming
priorities are set, which is important for obtaining the optimum
training r esults.
Musculoskelet al
Resistance training offers a multitude of benefi ts for females,
including the attenuation of age-related declines in bone miner al
density (89). Specifically, the stress from the mechanical loading
applied via resistance training directly increases the magni tude of
skeletal remodel ing and therefore bone mass. Resistance training
can increase bone miner al density in various skeletal regions of the
body (89). It is also known  that higher intensi ties of resistance
training promote greater degrees of osteogenesis  (103) and that
preadolescence is an opportune time to participate in weight -bearing
and other loaded activities in order to enhance bone miner al density
(65, 80).
Through participation in a resistance training program, females
can also experience muscle hypertr ophy. When sophisticated
techniques (e.g., computed tomogr aphy) are used to accurately
measur e changes in muscle cross-sectional area, relative short-term
(up to 16 weeks) gains in muscle hypertr ophy are similar between
sexes (43, 67). When the muscular development of female
weightl ifters, bodybui lders, and track and field athletes who have
not used anabol ic steroids is examined, it is obvious that muscle
hypertr ophy is possible in females who regularly participa te in high-
volume or high-intensi ty training programs, even though these gains
451
may be less than in males. A genetic disposi tion to develop a large
muscle mass ma y also be a contributing f actor (166).
Metabolic
The metabol ic system is a key system in physical activity, and
understanding its function is necessary to understanding the acute
responses and training adaptations of the other body systems. While
the metabol ic system operates similarly in males and females, some
differences exist that relate to the amount and type of muscle mass,
which can affect the magni tude of training-r elated adaptations.
Howev er, there is a lack of research comparing males and females of
similar training  backgr ounds, as well as in high-lev el athletes, which
limits the understanding of the metabol ic system and how it adapts
in female athletes.
Anaerobic Energy
The biochemical pathways that provide short-term energy include
ATP-PCr and glycolysis. While all muscle fibers can produce energy
with all types of biochemical pathways, the faster muscle fibers that
have a greater capaci ty for force production have a greater amount
of the substr ates (phosphocr eatine, glycogen) and enzym es needed
for the nonoxidativ e biochemical pathways (see chapter 3). On
average, males have a slightly higher proportion of these faster
(type II) muscle fiber types (84, 165). While both males and females
have the capaci ty to under go muscle hypertr ophy with various types
of anaer obic training, as previously indicated, the level of absolute
hypertr ophy attained by males will exceed that of females, resulting
in greater storage potential for phosphocr eatine and glycogen,
creatine kinase, and glycolytic enzymes, as well as greater overall
glycolytic capaci ty (54, 155).
Aerobic Energy
The biochemical pathways that provide energy for long-dur ation
activities involve the oxidativ e energy systems (i.e., Kreb’s cycle,
452
electr on transport chain, and lipid oxidation), which continuously
supply energy at rest and for lower intensi ty activities (62). The
oxidativ e pathways depend on the cardiorespiratory system’ s ability
to supply oxygen and remove metabol ic wastes, and resear ch
reviews have presented differences in males and females under
various condi tions (9, 29, 96, 186). Female endur ance athletes have
been shown to be more fatigue resistant during prolonged events,
despite having overall lower aerobic capaci ty (V̇O2max) relative to
body size and slower performance times than males (17, 48). This is
thought to be due to muscle fiber type distribution (165), with
females having a greater proportion of type I oxidativ e fibers on
average. Females therefore oxidize a greater amount of fat and a
lesser amount of carboh ydrate and protein (40, 170). This finding is
supported by Cardinale (2018), who determined that females have
close to 33% greater mitochondrial respiration than males. These
differences may present an advantage to female athletes in most
types of endur ance activi ties, including ul traendur ance ev ents (174).
Training adaptations in the aerobic energy pathways differ in
magni tude between males and females with regard to the
cardiovascular system in particular (145), which affects oxygen
delivery to the muscle tissue and subsequent oxidativ e energy
production. In females, more modest increases in blood volume and
similar or lesser increases in heart dimensions such as left
ventricular chamber size and wall thickness result from aerobic
endur ance training (11, 44) when compar ed to males. Howev er,
female athletes have similar adaptations compar ed to males with
regard to left ventricle function, including a greater ejecti on fraction
(159). Females  also present more efficient oxygen cost of running
than males at various running intensi ties (76) while maintaining their
running econom y across a range of velocities. All of these factors
affect overall aerobic performance, with females compe nsating for
smaller hearts  and less oxygen-carrying capaci ty by different
mechanisms than males.
453
Endocrine
The endocrine system  is responsible for regulating physiological
responses and adaptations to the various stressors encounter ed,
including physical activity. In response to strength training and
condi tioning, the endocrine system regulates muscular repair and
growth (58, 95) as the various anabol ic and catabol ic mechanisms
trigger ed by the endocrine system affect the ability of skeletal
muscle to gener ate force and to adapt to training (95). The
immediate, or acute, endocrine response to a training session
traditional ly has been thought to be a greater catalyst for muscle
tissue growth and remodel ing than the chronic changes in resting
hormonal concentr ations (94).
While a large number of hormones perform a myriad of functions
within the human body, a much smaller number affect muscle
responses to training, and even fewer have been the focus of
resear ch in athletic females. The primary hormones to have known
influence on muscle and strength development, which have been
studied in females, include testoster one, the growth hormone family,
insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1), and cortisol . It is also
important to understand gener al function of the hormones involved
in the menstrual cycle , because they can influence training and
performance in female athletes and are found in much higher
concentr ations than in males.
Testosterone
Testoster one is present in much higher concentr ations in males than
in females, but females produce testoster one in small quanti ties in
the ovaries and the adrenal gland (52). Howev er, resting
testoster one concentr ations are highly variable among  females,
which can account for the variability in responsiv eness to resistance
training of absolute hypertr ophy and strength (67), although relative
levels of hypertrophy and strength are similar between the sexes.
Despi te low testoster one concentr ations, females experience
stimulation of muscle protein synthesis (185). With an acute bout of
454
resistance exercise, females do not exhibi t significant elevations in
testoster one concentr ations (95, 177). Howev er, with prolonged
training, some acute elevations in testoster one have been observ ed
in females (137). These increases are likely due to a combination of
factors including a decreased rate of degradation, evidenced by
lower measur es of metabol ites of testoster one breakdown (49).
Therefore, in females, testoster one likely still has an important role
in the development of absolute muscular size, strength, and power
with resistance training and may also be an important indicator of
the tr ainabi lity of an individual (67 , 68).
Growth Hormones and Growth Factors
Growth hormones (GH)  have a primary role in muscle tissue
remodel ing and repair but do not function alone, because muscle
protein synthesis is trigger ed with the growth factor  known as
IGF-1. In females, it has been demonstr ated that resting
concentr ations of GH are higher than in males (92) and with chronic
training, GH levels at rest are lower in females compar ed to males
(171), which could indicate a greater sensitivity to the hormone, but
resear ch is lacking.
After chronic resistance training, circulating GH rises similarly in
females and males. Following an acute resistance exercise bout in
females, circulating GH concentr ations increase two- to fourfold (66,
83). The magni tude of the circulating GH increase depends on the
type of exercise stimulus as well as the amount of total work
performed. For example, exercise sessions consisting of high total
work (10RM load) and shorter rest interv als (1 minute) (92), large
muscle groups (95), multi-set protocols (126), and exercises that
induce elevations in blood lactate and reductions in blood glucose
(91, 95) result in significant elevations in GH. With training, the
magni tude of the ex ercise-induced rise in GH incr eases (171).
455
Cortisol
Cortisol is an important hormone that helps regulate blood glucose
levels as well as inflammation. Cortisol rises in anticipation of
exercise and sport competi tion in order to prepare the body for the
upcoming psychological and metabol ic demands (118, 140). This
anticipatory rise has been shown to be greater in trained females
than in sedentary females (47). The cortisol response  to acute
exercise is greatest in resistance exercise protocols that result in
higher levels of GH (91) and blood lactate (90). Several
investigations have demonstr ated that in comparison to males, the
cortisol response to acute exercise is attenuated in females (58, 66,
140). This is thought to be due to higher cortisol sensitivity in
females (156) or the impact of female sex hormones on modulating
activity of the sympathetic nervous system, adrenal glands, and
hypothalamus-pi tuitary axis (175).
Training influences the magni tude of the cortisol response in
females. Elite female athlete s do not exhibi t an anticipat ory rise in
cortisol before exercise (47) but do exhibi t higher cortisol secretion
and different patterns of secretion (158). In addition, female sex
hormones (estradiol  and progesterone ) may lower cortisol
responsivi ty, thereby potential ly altering the effects of cortisol over
the menstrual cycle (104). Immune factors modulate glucocorticoid
sensitivity (59), accounting for differences observ ed in female
athletes.
The Menstrual Cycle
Females experience the menstrual cycle during adolescence and
adulthood, approximately between the ages of 12 and 50 (56).
While the cycle is usually discussed in terms of reproductiv e
function, the menstrual cycle hormones also influence other body
functions that are related to exercise and training (37). There are
also times during the menst rual cycle when the body experiences
symptoms such as cramping, nausea, and headaches, which may
negativ ely affect the ability to engage in exercise sessions or a
456
training program. Therefore, it is important that practitioners have a
gener al understanding of the menstrual cycle and its physical
effects.
In brief, two primary hormones are released from the ovaries
during the menstrual cycle, estradiol and progester one. During the
initial half of the cycle, mens trual bleeding occurs and then estradiol
peaks and drops. Progester one rises and peaks during the second
half of the cycle, and there is a second but lesser peak of estradiol.
By the end of the cycle, both estradiol and progester one drop to
their lowest lev els (figure 8.1).
Estradiol
In menstruating adult females, the primary form of estrogen is
estradiol, which has been shown to directly affect the structure and
function of muscle, tendon, and ligaments, as well as contribute to
muscle mass and strength (37). Estradiol appears to have a more
protectiv e effect on skeletal muscle (100) by attenuating the amount
of damage. To do this, estradiol may decrease postex ercise
membr ane disruption, act as an antioxidant, act as a membr ane
stabilizer, and mediate inflammatory cell infiltration (53, 141). In
addition, estradiol may influence contractile properties of skeletal
muscle and muscle protein turno ver (71). This supports muscle mass
development by promoting protein synthesis over degradation and
enhancing sensitivity of the response to resistance training (71, 72).
High levels of estradiol are not always beneficial because decreases
in power and performance can result, which can increase the risk for
catastr ophic ligament injuries (37). Low levels of estradiol are
equal ly problematic, resulting in increased muscle cell death and
reduced sk eletal muscle mass and str ength (39, 87).
457
FIGURE 8.1 Phases of the menstrual cycle and the concomi tant changes in estrogen and
progester one.
Reprinted by permission from W.L. Kenney, J.H. Wilmore, and D.L. Costill, “Sex Differences in Sport and Exercise,” in
Physiology of Sport and Exercise, 9th ed. (Human Kinetics, 2024).
After an acute bout of resistance exercise, increased estradiol
concentr ations have been reported (94, 158). This response may
occur due to increased activity of the enzyme that converts
testoster one to estrogen (estradiol) (129), which may also contribute
to increases in circulating testoster one (101). Because of the
beneficial effects of estrogen on muscle, it is important for females
to maintain normal menstru al cycle function in order to maximiz e
their adaptatio ns to training (37) and reduce the risks associated
with low estr adiol lev els (173).
458