# Chapter 9: Psychological Foundations of Performance

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

**PDF Pages:** 465--535

CHAPTER  9
PSYCHOLOGICAL
FOUNDATIONS OF
PERFORMANCE
Daniel B. Hollander, EdD, and Adam Feit, PhD
The authors would like to acknowledge the significant contributions of Traci A. Statler ,
Andrea M. DuB ois, B radley D . Hatfield, and Ev an B. Brody to this chapter .
After completing this chapter, you will be able to
understand the psy chological constructs of ar ousal, motiv ation,
focus, and confidence and be able to ascertain their impact on
physical perf ormance;
compr ehend terms r elevant to psy chological ar eas of concern,
such as anxiet y, attention, and the ideal perf ormance state;
understand signs and symptoms of mental heal th issues,
predisposing f actors to injury , psychological r ecovery,
techniques to handle f ear of r einjury , introduction of
rehabi litation-t ype str ength and condi tioning, perf ormance
psychology concepts, ar ousal management concepts such as
self-efficacy , imagery , goal set ting, pr ogressive muscle
relaxation, and centering;
understand v arying w ays to manipulate pr actice schedules
including coaching psy chology of motor learning, whole–part,
465
random, and v ariable pr actice and how to use these schedules
to facilitate ski ll acquisi tion and learning; and
understand di fferent types of instructions and f eedback and
their appl ication in a pr actice and perf ormance set ting.
Excellence in athletic performance is the result of sound skill and
physical training accompanied by optimal rest and recovery cycles
and appropriat e diet. The role of sport psychology is to help athletes
achiev e more consistent levels of performance at or near their
physical potential by carefully managing their physical resour ces
through appropriate psychological strategies and techn iques. By
understanding these strategies and techniques, strength and
condi tioning professionals can better design sport-speci fic and even
position-speci fic training programs with the ultimate goal of
maximizing perf ormance.
After introducing foundational concepts, we address how one’s
mind, through cogni tion, can influence physical performance, and
then we describe the ideal performance state —the ultimate goal
of every athlete. In part, this state is marked by psychological and
physiological efficiency  (i.e., emplo ying only the amount of
mental and physical energy required to perform the task). We
discuss the primary psychological influences—motiv ation,  attention,
and arousal—o n skill acquisi tion and performance, citing several
theories of how these phenomena can change psychomotor learning
and athletic performance. Understanding mental health and the
impact of injuries on psychological states of athletes is discussed.
Finally, we describe coaching techniques and cues, including goal
setting, energy managem ent and relaxation, imagery, and
confidence development, that can be emplo yed to enhance overall
performance in strength and condi tioning environments, as well as
other perf ormance v enues.
466
Role of Sport Psychology
An athlete is someone who engages in a social comparison (i.e.,
competi tion) involving psychomotor skill or physical prowess (or
both) in an institutional ized setting, typical ly under public scrutin y or
evaluation. The essence of athletic competi tion involves comparing
onesel f to others and putting ego and self-esteem on the line in a
setting that is bound by rules and regulations. The psychological ly
well-prepared athlete is characteriz ed by efficiency of thought and
behavior. Efficiency is typical ly associated with skilled performance,
when actions are fluid and graceful, which conserv es energy. The
concept can also be extended to psychological activity; an efficient
athlete adopts  a task-relevant focus, not wasting attention on task-
irrelevant processing such as worrying, catastr ophizing, or thinking
about other things such as critical external observ ers such as a
coach or audience.
Sport psychology  is a multifaceted discipl ine, drawing on
constructs of exercise science and psychological principles, that
seeks to understand the influence of behavioral processes and
cogni tions on sport performance. Sport psychology is typical ly
classified as a scienti fic field of study within sports medici ne and has
three major goals:
Measuring psy chological phenomena
Investigating the relationships between psychological variables
and perf ormance
Applying theoretical knowledge to improve athletic
performance
By applying the information gained through an awareness of sport
psychology principles, athletes can better manage their physical
resour ces, thereby producing more effective performances. In
reality, many athletes come into the training and competi tive
environment with some rudimentary mental skills, but there is little
understanding of how these skills evolved or even how to best use
467
them for effective performance. Throughout this chapter we
introduce a structur e for understanding the interr elationships not
only between the mental skills themselv es but between the mental
skills and the physical, techn ical, and tactical skills being developed
in the weight room and on the practice field. Note, howev er, that
these skills can only be truly effective if they are understood,
practiced, and applied in a performance setting. Like the physical,
technical, and tactical constructs described throughout the rest of
this book, mental skills also need to be taught, practiced, integr ated
into perf ormance, and ev aluated f or effectiveness.
468
Ideal Performance State
The ideal performance state has been studied from a number of
perspectiv es. Williams and Krane (68) listed the following
characteristics that athletes t ypical ly report about this state:
Absence of f ear—no f ear of f ailure
No thinking about or analysi s of performance (related to the
motor stage of automatici ty)
A narr ow focus of at tention concentr ated on the activi ty itself
A sense of ef fortlessness— an involuntary experience
A sense of personal contr ol
A distortion of time and space, in which time seems to slow
In a sense, this ideal performance state seems to represent
everything that applied sport psychology programs attempt to
promote. There is an absence of negativ e self-talk, a strong feeling
of efficacy, and an adaptiv e focus on task-relevant cues. An
important aspect is that the athletes trust in their skill and
condi tioning levels and just let it happen, without interference from
negativ e cogni tive processes.
Kobe Bryant, a premier player in the National Basketball
Association, described being in this state, sa ying,
When that happens, you really do not try to focus on what’s
going on because … you could lose it in a second. Everything
becomes one noise— you don’t hear this or that; everything’ s
just one noise— you’re not paying attention to one or the
other.… You just really try to stay in the present and not let
anything break that rhythm. Again, as long as you just kind of
stay there, you become oblivious to everything that’s going on.
You don’t think about your surroundings or what’s going on
with the crowd or the team. You’re kind of locked in.… You
have to really try to stay in the present and not let anything
break that rh ythm.
469
Bryant’s comments richly reinforce many of the concepts discussed
throughout this chapter . It is important to remember that his mental
state rested largely on a sound physical training program and on a
history of performance success. Bryant exhibi ted phenomenal
physical prowess, arduously running sprints, training on the court,
and lifting weights in the off-season. Combined with superior
performance on the basketball court, such preparatory physical
effort contributed greatly to his focused, confident psychological
state.
470
Energy Management: Arousal, Anxiety,
and Stress
In order for athletes to perform effectively, they need to learn how
to best manage their menta l and physical energy levels. Athletes
who waste energy through worry , anger , frustration, or anxiet y
experience a greater likelihood of distraction and decreased self-
confidence, and they have less physical energy for when
performance is most important (20). Thus, the ability to maintain
self-contr ol and manage energy reserv es in a performance
environment is a cri tical ski ll for any perf ormer .
Mental energy is gener ated, maintained, depleted, and refreshed
via our emotio ns. Emotions  are tempor ary feeling states that occur
in response to events and that have both physiological and
psychological components (19). These emotions affect mental and
physical energy and therefore can have both beneficial and
detrimental effects on human performance. Emotions  such as
excitement can be beneficial to performance, causing us to feel
motiv ated, which elevates self-confidence and reinforces
commi tment levels. Howev er, emotions can be detrimental when an
athlete is overexcited or under excited (e.g., too amped up or too
flat) or when an athlete loses control of his or her emotions and
ceases to function effectively in a performance environmen t (e.g., an
athlete who cannot control his or her anger or frustration). Training
athletes to tap into their emotions to gener ate or elevate energy,
while maintaining a sense of control over those emotions, is a key
toward gener ating an ideal perf ormance state (64).
By arming athletes with the mental tools to combat inappr opriate
thoughts, enhance confidence, and reinforce motiv ation and
commi tment, coaches are providing many of the skills necessary to
allow the athlete to maintain composur e as wel l.
471
Arousal
The training environment provides a host of new and unfamiliar
experiences that create multiple opportuni ties to test onesel f and be
evaluated for effectiveness. Because of this, athletic performance is
frequently affected by arousal, anxiet y, and stress. These  terms are
often used interchangeably; howev er, in reality, they are different
elements wi thin the same construct.
Arousal  is simply a blend of physiological and psychological
activation in an individual and refers to the intensi ty of motiv ation at
any given moment (64). For example, a psyched-up athlete may
experience tremendous mental activation characteriz ed by positive
thoughts and a strong sense of control, whereas a flat athlete could
experience minimal activation characteriz ed by wandering thoughts
and feelings of boredom. Arousal is always present in an individual
to some degree, on a continuum ranging from being deeply asleep ,
or comatose, to highly excited; but in and of itself it is not
automatical ly associated with pleasant or unpleasant events. It is
simply a measur ement of activation, and as such can be index ed by
such metrics as heart rate, blood pressure, electr oencephalogr aphy
(EEG), electr omyography (EMG), and catecholamine levels, or with
self-report instruments such as the activation–deactiv ation checkl ist
(63). The optimal arousal required for efficient performance depends
on sev eral factors that ar e discussed later in the chapter .
Anxiety
Anxiety  is a subcategory of arousal in that it is a negativ ely
perceived emotional state characteriz ed by nervousness, worry ,
apprehension, or fear and is associated with a physiological
activation of the body (64). Because anxiet y requires the individual’ s
negativ e perception of a situation, it incorpor ates a cogni tive
component, called cognitive anxiety , as well as the physical
reaction, or somatic anxiety , evidenced through physical
symptoms such as tense muscles, tachycardia (fast heart rate), and
upset stomach.
472
The term anxiet y is often confusingly used to refer to both a
stable, enduring personal ity construct and a more short-term,
changeable mood state. These are, in fact, different constructs
within the emotional state of anxiet y. State anxiety  refers to a
subjectiv e experience of apprehension and uncertaint y accompanied
by elevated autonomic and voluntary neural outflow and increased
endocrine activity (57). State anxiet y is a gener ally negativ e
experience, but its effects on athletic performance can be positive,
negativ e, or indifferent, depending on such factors as the athlete’ s
skill level and personal ity and the complexi ty of the task to be
performed.
State anxiety is distinct from but related to trait anxiety , a
personal ity variable or disposi tion relating to the probabi lity that one
will perceive an environment as threatening. In essence, trait anxiet y
acts as a primer for the athlete to experience state anxiet y (58).
Trait anxiet y also affects the appropriate level of arousal for a given
individual. People with high levels of trait anxiet y tend to flood
attentional capacity with task-irrelevant cogni tions, such as thoughts
of failure, catastr ophe, or ego-oriented concerns. During a complex
decision-making task, these attentional ly demanding cues could
compr omise an athlete’ s selectiv e attention. The athlete with low
trait anxiet y may handle higher levels of pressure with decreased
thoughts of task f ailure.
State anxiety  is the actual experience of apprehension
and uncontrolled arousal. Trait anxiety is a perso nality
characteristic, which represents a latent disposition to
perceive situations as threatening.
In a non-anxio us state, arousal is under the control of the athlete;
it can be elevated or lower ed as needed. The athlete who is
psychological ly well prepared knows the appropriate zone for optimal
performance and can manage it accordingly . In an over-anxious
state, arousal is relatively uncontr olled; muscles are tense, the heart
473
is racing, and negativ e thoughts intrude. This lack of physical and
psychological efficiency  is typical ly initiated by uncertaint y about
a present or anticipated event. At least three important factors are
usually present:
A high degree of ego involvement, in which the athlete may
perceive a thr eat to sel f-esteem
A perceived discrepancy between one’s ability and the
demands f or athletic suc cess
A fear of the consequences of failure (such as a loss of
approval from teammates, coach, f amily, or peers)
Because these  constructs of anxiet y and arousal are complex and
interr elated, figure 9.1 provides a summary of the interr elationships
of arousal, state anxiet y, and trait anxiet y and the cogni tive and
somatic components of anxiet y.
474
FIGURE 9.1  The interr elationships of ar ousal, tr ait anxiet y, and state anxiet y.
Reprinted by permission from R. Weinberg and D. Gould, Foundations of Sport and Exercise Psychology (Human
Kinetics, 2015).
Stress
Stress  is defined as a substantial imbalance between demand
(physical, psychological, or both) and perceived response capabi lity,
under conditions in which failure to meet that demand has important
consequences (51). A stressor  is an environmental or cogni tive
event that precipitates stress (i.e., the stress response). Stress can
be described as a negativ e (distress ) or a positive (eustress )
state. Both of these gener ate arousal but only when the perception
of the stressor is negativ e—distr ess—does it also gener ate anxiet y.
Therefore, distress comprises  cogni tive and somatic anxiet y, whereas
eustress comprises posi tive mental ener gy and ph ysiological ar ousal.
475
Theoretical Tenet s of Arousal, Anxiety,
and Motivation on Performance
Once an understanding of the gener al concepts of arousal, anxiet y,
and stress is attained, the next step lies in deconstructing  how these
emotional elements influence  performance. Why does arousal affect
one athlete beneficial ly and another detrimental ly? This section
examines a number of theories and models that attempt to explain
this relationship between arousal and performance. It begins with
the simplest construct —Hul l’s (56) drive theory —and builds on it
with Yerkes and Dodson’ s (76) inverted-U theory , describing the
mediating influences of skill level, task complexi ty, and personal ity.
Other related theories that further explain this relationship are
outlined, including Hanin’ s (23) individual zones of optimal
functioning (IZOF), Fazey and Hardy’s (24) catastr ophe theory , and
finally, Kerr’s (30) r eversal theory .
Drive Theory
When resear chers first started examining the relationshi p between
arousal and performance, it was thought to follow a direct and linear
progression. Hull’s drive theory  (56) proposes that as an
individual’ s arousal or state anxiet y increases, so too does
performance. Thus, the more psyched up athletes become, the
better they perform. This may hold true as an athlete progresses
from relatively low levels of arousal to somewhat higher amounts,
but most would recogniz e that more arousal is not always better,
because performers can clearly be too pumped up to perform well.
Depending on the skill and experience levels of the performer , the
complexi ty of the activity, or both, more arousal may be beneficial,
but it can in fact also be detrimental. When people perform well-
learned or simple skills, a higher level of arousal can benefi t
performance. Howev er, the more complex a given skill becomes, or
the less experience an athlet e has with that skill, the more arousal
476
can produce catastr ophic performance outcomes (64). Also, self-
confidence serves as a buffer for anxiet y, and when self-confidence
goes down, anxiet y typical ly incr eases.
Skill Level
An athlete’s skill level can increase the latitude of optimal arousal;
that is, the more skill an athlete has developed, the better he or she
can perform during states of less-than or greater-than-optimal
arousal (64). In the beginning stages of learning a skill, the athlete
is in a stage of analysis or cogni tion (17). This means that he or she
has to think about actions. For example, a novice basketball player
has to be conscious of the ball while dribbl ing and needs to devote
some attention  to the task. At a given level of arousal, worrisome
thoughts compete with an attentional capaci ty already filled with
details of motor performanc e (i.e., dribbl ing). If a new situation
suddenly develops, the novice’s mind is already occupied, and he or
she ma y not see i t.
The optimal arousal point is lower for less skilled athletes than for
more advanced athletes. Therefore, coaches should lower arousal
and decrease the decision-making responsibi lities of developing or
unseasoned athletes (players who are skilled but lack competi tive
experience) and have them focus on simple assignments to prevent
attentional overload. In coaching weightl ifting athletes during an
important meet, instructions to novice competi tors should be simple,
clear, and direct. When they experience success, the derived self-
confidence may reduce negativ e self-talk and the sense of
uncertaint y that t ypical ly char acteriz es such perf ormers.
Task Complexity
A second factor that influen ces the appropriate level of arousal to
achiev e optimal performance is task complexi ty (42). Most athletic
skills are exceedingly complex from a biomechanical perspectiv e, but
the more concerning comp lexity relates to consciou s decision
making. For example, running is a very complex task in terms of
477
motor control and functional anatom y, but athletes fortunately do
not have to devote much conscious attention to this coordinated
action. In fact, the action can become altered and inefficient if they
think about it too much, because they change the neural sequences
for movement initiation. From an attentional perspectiv e, simple or
well-learned skills are less affected by a high degree of arousal
because they have few task-relevant cues to monitor (64).
Fortunately , then, physiologic al arousal, which typical ly accompanies
emotional arousal, may be beneficial. Howev er, the situation is
dramatical ly reversed for skills that necessi tate consciou s decision-
making effort, such as those required by a goalie in soccer or a
basebal l catcher who is facing a critical, bases-loaded pitch. In these
instances, arousal must be optimiz ed because of the need to
maintain a wider f ocus so as to r ecogniz e relevant at tentional cues.
Inverted-U Theory
Building on the basic relationship outlined in drive theory , Yerkes and
Dodson (76) proposed one of the major tenets of the arousal–
performance relationship—th e inverted-U theory . Basically, this
theory states that arousal facilitates performance up to an optimal
level, beyond which further increases in arousal are associated with
reduced performance. Figure 9.2 graphically shows this relationship .
Most coaches and athletes intuitively accept this hypothesis, because
they have all experienced poor performance when feeling flat or
under -aroused, as well as when they feel too amped up or out of
control. The inverted-U concept helps coaches and athletes
understand why arousal affects performance and enables them to
gain greater control over the appropriate level of arousal for a given
athlete within a given sport. It should be noted, howev er, that the
generic shape of the curve in this relationship has been criticized,
given our understanding of the individual influences of skill, ability,
experience, and task complexi ty as described pr eviously (20).
478
Individual Zones of Optimal Functioning
Theory
Hanin (23) noted the interactions of individual factors that affect
optimal arousal for performance and developed the individual
zones of optimal functioning  theory . Dr. Hanin holds that
different people, in different types of performances, perform best
with very different levels of arousal. This theory differs from the
inverted-U hypothesis in two ways: (1) Ideal performance does not
seem to always occur at the midpoint of the arousal continuum, and
(2) rather than there being a single defined arousal point at which
optimal performance occurs across sporting activities, the best
performance can occur within a small range, or bandwidth, of
arousal level. Further , Hanin  proposed that there are positive and
negativ e emotions (e.g., excited and nervous) that can gener ate
enhanced performance, just as there are positive and negativ e
emotions (e.g., comfortable and annoyed) that can debilitate
performance. This proposal is important because it recogniz es that
any specific emotion can be positively perceived by one athlete but
negativ ely perceived by another . In practice, then, athletes can
retrospectiv ely recall the arousal associated with several of their
performances that differ in quality. They can then monitor emotions
and arousal levels before an important match and make adjustments
to incr ease the chances of f alling into this individual ideal z one.
479
FIGURE 9.2  Inverted-U theory and i ts modi fications.
Reprinted by permission from B.D. Hatfield and G.A. Walford, “Understanding Anxiety: Implications for Sport
Performance,” National Strength and Conditioning Association Journal 9 (1987): 60-61.
Catastrophe Theory
According to Hardy (24), assessment of the cogni tive and somatic
dimensions of arousal can sharpen the ability to predict (and
therefore control) their impact on performance. Earlier assumptions
associated with the inverted-U theory held that increases in arousal
beyond the optimal level resulted in gradual, proportionate declines
in performance. Howev er, common observ ation tells us that this is
not always the case— an athlete may suffer a severe and
catastr ophic decline rather than a gradual quadr atic or curvilinear
480
decline in performance, and restoring a degree of calm does not
necessari ly bring a return to the level of performance exhibi ted
before the decline. In this model, the catastrophe theory , somatic
arousal has a curvilinear, inverted-U relationship to athletic
performance, whereas cogni tive anxiet y shows a stead y negativ e
relationship to performance. When increases in physiologi cal arousal
occur in the presence of cogni tive anxiet y, a sudden drop—r ather
than a gradual decline—in  performance occurs. The practical
implication of this theory is that the arousal constructs need to be
more clearly delineated as cogni tive anxiet y, physiological arousal,
somatic anxiet y, or some combination of these.
Reversal Theory
Kerr’s (30) interpr etation of reversal theory  posits that the way in
which arousal and anxiet y affect performance depends on the
individual’ s interpr etation of that arousal. Essential ly, one athlete
might interpret high levels of arousal as excitement and indicativ e of
performance readiness , while another athlete, experiencing the
same emotion at the same arousal level, would interpr et that feeling
as unpleasant and reflectiv e of a lack of confidence. This idea
implies that athletes have within their power the ability to reverse
their interpretation of their own arousal; instead of perceiving high
arousal as scary and worriso me, they can choose to reverse their
perception and interpr et the arousal as reflecting excitement and
anticipation. This theory is important because it emphasiz es that
one’s interpretation of arousal, and not just its amount, is significant.
Further , it shows that the way in which arousal and anxiet y influence
performance— whether they are beneficial or detrimental to
performance—is wi thin the contr ol of the individual.
481
Motivation
As mentioned earlier in this chapter , motiv ation is a primary
psychological factor in the acquisi tion and effective performance of
motor skills. Motivation  can be defined as the intensi ty and
direction of effort (64). Selected aspects of motiv ational phenomena
are highlighted in the following sections. We first discuss intrinsic
and extrinsic motiv ation, which greatly influence the athlete’ s desire
to train and compete. Then we discuss achiev ement motiv ation,
which helps to explain individual differences in competi tiveness.
Finally, positive and negativ e reinforcement are explained as they
apply to ski ll learning and perf ormance.
Intrinsic and Extrinsic Motivation
Intrinsic motivation  is important for any athlete. Deci (13)
defined this construct as a desire to be competent and self-
determining. With intrinsic motiv ation, athletes are driven because of
their love of the game and the inherent reward they feel from
participation. This is motiv ation that comes from within the athlete
and is exhibi ted regardless of the existence of material reward or
punishment. Intrinsical ly motiv ated athletes focus on the enjoyment
or fun they experience in the activity and gener ally desire to learn
and improve because of this love for the behavior in and of itself
(64). How can such a desirable state be maintained or encour aged?
The answer lies in Deci’s (13) defini tion, which stresses success
(competence) and “pulling one’s own strings” (self-determination).
Appropriate goals, especial ly for training (i.e., process) or
performance (i.e., product),  can increase perceived competence.
Additional ly, giving the athlete some latitude in decision making
increases perceived self-determination (13). Although authori tarian
behavior is sometimes warranted in sport, in that clear directives are
needed in a stressful and competi tive environment, a total lack of
delegated responsibi lities could result in a loss of initiative and drive
in athletes (64).
482
In opposition, extrinsic motivation  is motivation that comes
from some external as opposed to internal source. Numer ous
examples of this exist, because it is founded on an individual ized
reward construct; examples of more common extrinsic rewards in
sport settings include awards, trophies, praise from coaches and
teammates, social approval, and fear of punishment. It should be
noted that athletes are rarely completely intrinsical ly or extrinsical ly
motiv ated; rather, they exhibi t varying degrees along this motiv ation
continuum depending on the activity, their perceptions of
competence, the level of importance the activity has, and a host of
other v ariables (11, 13, 38, 64 , 68).
Achievement Motivation
Within the gener al construct of motiv ation lies a more specifically
targeted type called achievement motivation , which refers to a
person’ s efforts to master a task, achiev e excellence, overcome
obstacles, and engage in competition or social comparison . All things
being equal between two athletes, whoev er is higher in achievement
motiv ation will be the better athlete because he or she has a greater
appeti te for competi tion (64).
McClel land and colleagues (38) theoriz ed that all people have
opposing personal ity traits within themselv es: the motive to
achieve success (MAS)  and the motive to avoid failure (MAF) .
The MAS relates to the capacity to experience pride in one’s
accompl ishments and is characteriz ed by a desire to challenge
onesel f and evaluate one’s abilities. On the other hand, the MAF
relates to the desire to protect one’s ego and self-esteem. Despi te its
name, however, MAF is not really about avoiding failure itself. It is
more about avoiding the perception of shame that accompanies the
failure.
Gener ally, MAS-dominated athletes are most intrigued by
situations that are either uncertain or challenging, with an
approximate 50% probabi lity of success (64). This creates
opportuni ties to assess one’s abilities. On the other hand, MAF-
483
dominated players are more comfortable in situations in which it is
either very easy to achiev e success (thereby avoiding shame) or so
extremely difficult that there would be no expectation of winning
(again, eliminating the likelihood of feeling shame) (64). At higher
levels of sport involvement,  it is unlikely that athletes would be
dominated by MAF, but they would certainly show degrees or a
range of competi tiveness. Confronted by a very challenging goal,
such as gaining a significant amount of lean muscle weight during
the hypertr ophy phase of a periodiz ed cycle, the MAF-dominated
individual might r educe ef fort because he or she f ears f ailure and the
threat to self-esteem (and might also claim that the goal is
unrealistic), whereas the MAS-dominated individual might heighten
effort in r esponse to the chal lenge and not per ceive any threat.
Motivational Aspects of Skill Learning
(Self-Controlled Practice)
In addition to providing the individual with informatio n for skill
acquisi tion, practice, instructions, and feedback can also act as
motiv ational factors for enhancing performance. Practice schedules
that address the fundamen tal psychological needs of autonom y,
competence, and social relatedness can influence motiv ation (73). Of
interest in the motor learning literature is the role of self-
controlled practice  in enhancing motiv ation, performance, and
skill learning. Self-contr olled practice involves the athlete in decisions
related to the practice structu re, including when to receive feedback
or which skill to practice; it also involves simply asking athletes how
they believe they are doing (10, 11, 12, 73). This promotes a more
active involvement in the practice session and can enhance feelings
of competence and auton omy (11, 12). As a result of this
heightened motiv ation, performance and learning improve (11, 12).
Engaging the athletes in some decisions related to the practice
schedule is an easy yet effective way to allow them autonom y and
ownership in reaching their sport performance goals. The concepts
484
of instructions, feedback, and practice schedules are discussed in
greater depth later in this chapter .
Positive and Negative Reinforcement in
Coaching
Coaches can also benefi t from understanding the concepts of
positive and negativ e reinforcement and positive and negativ e
punishment as they relate to motiv ation (37). Positive
reinforcement  is the act of increasing the probabi lity of occurrence
of a given behavior (a target behavior, such as correct footwork in
basketball, is termed an operant ) by following  it with a positive
action, object, or event such as praise, decals on the helmet, or
prizes and awards. Negative reinforcement  also increases the
probabi lity of occurrence of a given operant, but it is accompl ished
through the removal of an act, object, or event that is typical ly
aversive. For example, if the team showed great hustle in practice
(i.e., the operant is enthu siasm and hustle), the coach could
announce that no wind sprints would be required at the session’ s
end. This coaching reinforcement style focuses attention on what the
athlete is doing corr ectly.
Punishment, on the other hand, is designed to decrease the
occurrence of a given operant—that is, negativ e behaviors such as
mistak es or a lack of effort. Positive punishment  is the
presentation of an act, object, or event following a behavior that
could decrease the behavior’s occurrence. An example is
reprimanding a player after a mistak e or making an athlet e do push-
ups or sprints after a fumble. Negative punishment , or the
removal of something valued, could take the form of revoking
privileges or playing time, as in benching. Although coaches use a
mixtur e of both reward and punishment, reinforcement (i.e.,
reward), or a positive approach, is arguably better because it
focuses on what athletes should  do and what they did right (termed
specific positive feedback ). Reinforcement (both positive and
negativ e) increases task-relevant focus rather than worry focus. A
485
task-relevant focus facilitates reaction time and decision making.
With reinforcement, athlete s also build long-term memories of
success, self-esteem, self-efficacy , and confidence. Successful
experiences more likely color the athlete’ s view of competition as
desirable and as an opportun ity to perform. Of course, coaches may
punish unwarranted lack of effort, but it seems ineffective to punish
athletes for mistak es if they are making the effort to perform
correctly.
How Should Positive and Negative
Reinforcement Be Applied?
Coaches should gener ally subscribe to a reinforcement strategy to assist
athletes to f ocus on what they do corr ectly.
Punishment should be used sparingly , because it increases the likelihood that
athletes wi ll focus on what they ar e doing incorr ectly.
Under conditions that promote a narrow focus of attention, positive
reinforcement aids a focus on task-relevant cues, while punishment floods
attentional capaci ty with a pr edominance of task -irrelevant cues.
486
Attention and Focus
The athlete’ s ability to focus can be better understood through the
construct of attention. Attention  is defined as the processin g of
both external and internal cues that come to awareness. A
performer ’s conscious attention is continuously bombar ded with a
variety of external stimul i and internal thoughts to which it can be
directed. The ability to inhibi t awareness of some stimul i in order to
process others is termed selective attention , and it suppr esses
task-irrelevant cues (e.g., people on the sidelines, planes flying over
the stadium) in order to process the task-relevant cues in the limited
attentional space. For a basebal l pitcher, task-relevant cues might
include the hi tter’s tendencies and the locations of runners on base.
Selective attention, commonly referred to by athletes as
their  level of focus , is the suppression of task-irrelevant
stimuli and thoughts.
American footbal l coaches often exploi t the strategic potential of
selectiv e attention of their opponents by calling a time-out just
before a field goal attempt. During the time-out, the opposing
athlete might selectiv ely attend more to task-irrelevant thoughts of
self-doubt and the potentia l for failure, rather than the more
beneficial thoughts of self-reassur ance or a focus on minor
instructional cues. Placekick ers can deal with this anxiet y and
attentional challenge by adopting a ritual or a mental checkl ist,
commonly referred to as a routine , that consciously directs
thoughts to task-relevant and controllable concerns (e.g., breathing,
checking the turf , and str etching the hamstrings).
The important underlying principle is that thinking one set of
thoughts actively precludes attending to other worrisom e thoughts
because of the limited capaci ty of working memory . This human
shortcoming can be used to advantage. Before a lifting performance,
for example, the athlete might use key phrases to focus on the task-
487
relevant cues associated with the lift, such as foot placement, back
position, point of visual focus, and knee angle during a squat. This
strategy can reduce distractions, which often deter optimal effort.
Such focusing strategies can promote mental consistency during the
preparatory state, which in turn can promote physical consistency —
the hal lmark of a ski lled athlete.
It is also important to note that the ability to focus attention on
task-relevant cues and to control distraction is a skill that can be
learned and that improves with increased experience. According to
Fitts and Posner’s (17) classic theory , the athlete progresses through
three stages when learning new motor skills. The first stage, termed
the cogni tive stage , is characteriz ed by effortful and conscious
regulation of the movement. That is, the athlete has to think about
the details of the task. During the second stage, the associativ e
stage , the athlete must focus on the task but is less concerned  with
the details of the movement. Finally, the athlete achiev es the stage
of automatici ty, during which the mind is relaxed and the skill is
executed automatical ly without thinking. Assuming proper instruction
and coaching, the relaxed mind focuses only on what is relevant to
the task at that moment and, at the same time, automati cally filters
out all irrelevant cues. Attaining automatici ty of action and the clarity
of thought that often ac companies i t is a goal f or man y athletes.
Attentional Styles
Nideffer (41) formulated an important concept in sport psychology
when he theoriz ed that individuals tend to experience shifting
categories of attentional styles during performance. These  categories
are characteriz ed by two dimensions: direction (internal–external)
and width (broad–narr ow). The first dimension refers to an
introspectiv e versus an externally oriented perspectiv e, whereas the
second dimension refers to an integr ative (expansiv e) versus a
highly selectiv e orientation. These dimensions each occur on
overlapping continuums, creating four quadr ants of attentional
focus: broad external, in which the athlete assesses the situation by
488
looking at the environment and various elements within it; broad
internal, in which the athlete  processes information and develops a
strategy; narrow internal, in which the athlete mental ly rehearses
the upcoming action; and narrow external, in which the athlete
specifically focuses on one or two external cues to gener ate action.
These constructs and their relationships to each other can be seen in
figure 9.3.
FIGURE 9.3  Four quadr ants of at tentional f ocus.
Adapted from Nideffer (1976).
Understanding attentional styles can improve coaching
effectiveness. For example, an athlete who tends to become
overloaded with external stimuli might be coached to focus on one
important cue, such as an opponent ’s footwork. Athletes who seem
to get lost in their own head could practice describing out loud, to a
coach, what they are feeling during a lunge. Without such coaching,
these players would likely attend to inappr opriate cues and react too
slowly .
489
Psychological Techniques for Improved
Performance
Improving one’s use of mental skills can enhance performance on
sporting courts, in training rooms, and on practice fields; it can also
transfer to better performance in all areas of life. These
psychological skills are quite similar to physical, technical, and
tactical skills in that they can be taught and learned and must be
practiced on a regular basis if they are to gener ate long-term
behavioral change. This next section introduces several of these
psychological skills that can be integr ated into training to improve
overall performance.
Relaxation Techniques to Control Elevated
Arousal and Anxiety
Several techniques can be used to help athletes manage their
psychological processes through relaxation. Relaxation techniques
are designed to reduce physiological arousal and increase task-
relevant focus. These techniques are important when people are
executing complex tasks or practicing new ones, when they are
dealing with pressure situations, or when deliberate focus is
necessary .
Diaphragmatic Breathing
One simple technique for reaching a higher level of physical and
mental relaxation is diaphragmatic breathing  (63). Referred to as
belly breathing , this form of breathing is a basic stress management
technique and a precursor to virtual ly all other mental training
techniques. It focuses attention on the process of breathing to clear
the mind and therefore increase concentr ation. During any mental
training exercise, athletes should attempt to engage in deep,
rhythmic breathing in a relaxed, natural manner . Physiological ly, this
form of breathing has a major influence on decreasing heart rate
490
and muscle tension due to feedback mechanisms that link the
respiratory and cardiac control centers in the brain stem. The
relatively deep inspir ation, followed by a controlled expiration, alters
autonomic nervous system (ANS) balance to emphasiz e
parasympathetic neural activity and vagal tone (44). The
parasympathetic branch of the ANS promotes the opposi te effect of
the sympathet ic-mediated fight-or-flight response. Thus, rhythmic
breathing can decrease neural stimulation of both the skeletal
muscles and organs (e.g., heart, lungs, liver), resulting in a sense of
deep r elaxation.
Diaphr agmatic breathing requires that attention be directed to the
abdominal region. It is best to get familiar with this starting from a
standing position so that breathing is not inhibi ted. The athlete
should let the arms hang loosely and concentr ate on relaxing,
particularly in the neck and shoulder region, by first taking a couple
of deep breaths. Next, the athlete should relax the abdominal
muscles so that they appear flaccid. The initiation of each breath
should occur simultaneously with the relaxed protrusion of the
abdomen; placing a hand on the abdomen gives feedback to ensur e
that the abdomen protrudes with the initiation of each breath. With
each breath the abdomen should become naturally distended. When
this portion of the technique is performed properly , the diaphr agm (a
muscle at the base of the lungs) contracts and drops, allowing a
deeper breath to occur. This is the first stage of taking a maximal
inhalation. The entire process of inhalation takes place in three
different areas and stages: the lower abdomen, the mid-chest, and
finally the upper chest. Diaphr agmatic breathing can be combined
with more dynamic muscular relaxation techniques like progressive
muscular r elaxation and autogenic tr aining.
Progressive Muscular Relaxation
To achieve an appropriate level of cogni tive and somatic activation
before performance, athletes may emplo y progressive muscle
relaxation (PMR) (28). Progressive muscle relaxation  is a
491
technique by which psychological and physical arousal are self-
regulated through the control of skeletal muscle tension. In essence,
by going through a series of alternating muscular tensing and
relaxing phases, the athlete learns to become aware of somatic
tension and thereby control it. The hope is that a relaxed body will
promote a r elaxed mind.
These tensing and relaxing cycles progress from one muscle
group to the next until all muscle groups are optimal ly relaxed. Each
cycle involves maximal ly tensing each muscle for a short period of
time (10-15 s), followed by a conscious attempt to relax that muscle
completely , before moving on to the next muscle group. With
practice, an athlete learns to rapidly discern the difference between
a tense muscle and a relaxed one and then actively take steps to
gener ate the needed muscular r elaxation.
In many cases, a positive side effect of the reduced muscle
tension is an increase in smooth, fluid, or efficient movement as well
as an increased range of motion around the joint. This can be an
effective self-regulation techn ique for some athletes before practice
or competition, or even during an intense moment in a given
contest. Therefore, athletes should practice this technique in the
days leading up to competi tion (rather than on the day of) to
determine i ts individual impact.
Autogenic Training
For athletes who are injured or who for some reason find it
uncomf ortable or impractical to experience high muscu lar tension
levels, the PMR cycle for each muscle group can be replaced with an
attentional state that simply focuses on the sense of warmth and
heaviness for a particular limb or muscle group. This technique,
referred to as autogenic training , consists of a series of exercises
designed to produce physical sensations in the body—gener ally
warmth and heaviness (64). Because autogenic training  eliminates
the need for uncomf ortable levels of muscle tension in the
contraction–r elaxation cycles, older athletes or athletes in
492
rehabi litation from injury may find this an attractive alternativ e to
PMR.
Relaxation techniques are designed to reduce
physiological arousal and increase task-relevant focus.
These techniques are of extreme importance when one
is executing complex or novel tasks or performing in
high-pressure situations.
Systematic Desensitization
Sometimes fears are learned by association of previously neutral
stimul i with a stressful event. For example, an adult non-swimmer
who experienced a threatening event in the water as a child may
avoid activities around water because of a learned association. This
individual may become fearful and therefore tense doing basic
resistance or stretching exercises in a pool, even ones that require
no swimming skill. This example illustrates the importance of
understanding exercise science. For example, the aquatic
environment is a great aid in enhancing flexibi lity. To benefi t
maximal ly from a stretching program, howev er, a participant must
learn to fully relax. If the purpose of the pool session is to enhance
flexibi lity, the inability of a non-swimmer to relax in the environment
could easi ly prevent gains in flexibi lity.
One technique that helps an athlete initially confront or reduce
fear is systematic desensitizatio n (SD) (71). Systematic
desensi tization combines mental and physical techniques  that allow
an athlete to replace a fear response to various cues with a
relaxation response. Like cognitive–affective stress management
training (SMT) and stress inoculation training (SIT), systematic
desensi tization teaches the athlete to use a specific relaxation skill-
based coping response to control for cogni tive arousal (64). This
adaptiv e, learned replacement process, the principle behind SD, is
called counterconditioning .
493
To practice the technique, an athlete should be reasonably skilled
at both PMR and mental imagery . The athlete should construct a
hierarchy, or progression, of events and situations that he or she
specifically perceives as fearful. For example, a competi tive gymnast
who suffered a serious injury on the balance beam may list a series
of fearful scenes, proceeding from warming up before the event to
the actual mo vement that pr ecipitated the injury .
In a relaxed setting the athlete visual izes the first scene and
experiences a mild degree of anxiet y. At the same time,
diaphr agmatic breathing, PMR, or another physical relaxation
technique is instituted, and a strong relaxation response theoretically
should overcome the relatively weak fight-or-flight  syndr ome. This
technique is practiced until the athlete can hold the image clearly
while maintaining a relaxed state. The athlete progresses through
the hierarchy, experiencing condi tioned fear in small, manageable
doses that are overcome by the relaxation achiev ed with the
relaxation technique. This procedur e prevents cogni tive avoidance
and counter condi tions a new response (i.e., relaxation) to the
formerly f ear-inducing stimul i (64).
How Should Athletes Use Arousal Control
Techniques?
An athlete  should emplo y arousal reduction techniques when performing a
new skill or one that is complex or when performing in high-pr essure
situations.
Athletes should emplo y arousal enhancement techniques when executing
simple ski lls, ones that ar e well learned, or in si tuations of minimal pr essure.
The purpose of employing such techniques is to allow the athlete to perform
with an unbur dened mind while matching his or her mental and physical
intensi ty to the demands of the task.
Imagery
Imagery  is a cogni tive skill in which the athlete creates or re-
creates an experience in his or her mind (64). Ideally, for athletes, it
494
uses all the senses to create a mental experience of an athletic
performance. The athlete simulates reality by mental ly rehearsing a
movement, imagining visual, auditory, kinesthetic, olfactory , and
even gustatory (taste) cues. Feltz and Landers (16) provided
convincing evidence for the effectiveness of mental imagery in the
enhancement of sport skill based on a meta- analytic review of the
literature. During the initial stages of using imagery , the athlete may
start with a relatively simple, somewhat familiar visual image. This
helps successful practice of the technique. As with learning any skill
by proceeding from simple to complex, the person starts with static
images, such as visual izing a golf ball or mental ly examining the
visual characteristics of a tennis racket. The vividness or detail of the
image should become clearer and clearer with continued practice.
Some people have a natural talent for achieving image clarity, but
everyone can impr ove with repeated pr actice.
The perspectiv e of the image can be internal (first person) or
external (third person). Although the resear ch literature is unclear as
to whether one is superior , it seems that an image that is more
engaging and natural to the athlete would be most appropriate. Of
course, the internal, first-person perspectiv e seems more specific to
skill execution, inasmuch as the actual task is performed with such
an orientation. Howev er, because many athletes are familiar with
reviewing film or recordings of their performances, an external
perspectiv e may also f eel natur al.
After the athlete successfully visual izes a stationary object with
vivid detail, he or she may start to move the object or begin to walk
around it in the mind, viewing it from a number of different
perspectiv es. For an image such as a basketball, the athlete may
attempt to bounce the ball and feel it against the fingertips. In this
manner , the athlete increases complexi ty by controlling the image or
moving it with control (e.g., bouncing the ball) and by bringing a
multisensory perspectiv e to bear (i.e., using tactile or kinesthetic as
well as visual sensation).
495
Rehearsing successful execution of a skill during imagined
competi tive condi tions can provide the subconscious mind with
positive memories, thus increasing the athlete’ s sense of confidence
and preparedness for the particular sport. Of course, mental imaging
is not as powe rful a determinant of self-efficacy as actual success,
but it does offer two potential ly potent ingredients. First, successful
performance is entirely under the control of the athlete during
imaging, whereas a degree of uncertaint y about the outcome is
inherent in reality. In imagery the athlete has a great opportuni ty to
experience success. We believe that athletes should be realistic in
the kinds of success they imagine; that is, the mental images should
be personal ly challenging yet within the realm of possibi lity. Second,
the athlete can experience competi tion repeatedly , fostering a sense
of familiarity and pr eparedness.
For some athletes, the month s of preparation for a season of play
—involving off-season, preseason, and in-season condi tioning and
skill development —may lead to only a few minutes of actual
competi tive experience. Even for the starters in team sports, actual
competi tive experience may be extremely small relative to physical
practice time. Mental image ry, however, allows the athlete  to get
used to this uncertain environment over longer periods of time
despite minimal r eal-world competi tive opportuni ty.
Self-Efficacy
Of course, one of the main objectiv es for applied sport psychology is
gener ating a psychological perspectiv e that improves performance,
and it has been argued that perceived self-confidenc e, or self-
efficacy (1), is a better predictor of task execution than either
arousal or anxiet y. Self-confidence  is the belief that one can
successfully perform a desired behavior (64), while self-efficacy , a
situational ly specific form of self-confidence, is the perception of
one’s ability to perform a given task in a specific situation (4).
Someone who is highly self-efficacious does not doubt his or her
ability to suc ceed at a giv en task, ev en when f ailure is experienced.
496
According to Bandur a’s theory (4), a person’ s self-efficacy is
derived from a number of sour ces:
Performance accompl ishment s—past experiences of success or
failure
Vicarious experiences —watching others (model ing)
Verbal persuasion —encour agement f rom sel f or others
Imaginal experience —using imagery to see onesel f perf orm
Physiological states—perception of arousal as facilitative or
debilitative
Emotional states —affect or mood
These sources translate well into sport and training environments
and can be influenced by the coaches as well as the athlete
themselv es.
It is thought that if an athlete has the necessary skill set and an
acceptable level of motiv ation, the resulting performance is largely
determined by self-efficacy (4). Skill alone is not enough to ensur e
effective performance— athletes have to want to perform well and
need to believe they can be successful in their endea vors.
Furthermor e, individuals’ level of self-efficacy influences the choices
made— whether toward certain activities that they feel confident
about or away from those about which confidence is lacking.
Similarly, this construct additional ly influences level of overall effort
as well as persistence in the face of obstacles, because those who
believe in themselv es gener ally work harder and are more
determined to attain the desired outcome than those without the
necessary levels of self-efficacy (64). Clearly , the perception of one’s
ability to successfully perform the tasks of sport or training has a
direct impact on the actual perf ormance.
Self-efficacy influences people’s choice of activity, their
level of effort in that activ ity, and how much persistence
they will have in the face of challenging obstacles.
497
Self-Talk
A technique frequently used to enhance self-efficacy , aid in directing
proper focus, assist in regulating arousal levels, and reinforce
motiv ation is self-talk . Self-talk, or intrapersonal communication, is
the inner dialogue we have with ourselv es (64). It is what we say to
ourselv es, either out loud or in our heads, that provides the
soundtr ack for our beha viors and perf ormances.
Self-talk is gener ally categoriz ed as positive, negativ e, or
instructional and can be either spontaneously gener ated or more
purposef ully used to gener ate changes in mood or behaviors (61).
Positive self-talk can include utterances or statements that are
encour aging (e.g., “Come on!”), motiv ational (e.g., “I can do this!”),
or reinforcing (e.g., “I am ready! ”) and gener ally reflects favorable
emotions or feelings. Negativ e self-talk gener ally reflects anger ,
discour agement, doubt, or negativ e judgment (e.g., “You suck!” “You
can’t do this.” “What were you thinking?”). Instructional self-talk
gener ally provides specific direction or focus on necessary
performance cues for a particular skill or strategy (e.g., “Feet
shoulder -width apart. ” “Keep y our torso er ect.”).
Positive and instructional ly focused self-talk have been found to
improve performance in laboratory settings; howev er, significant
individual and environmental differences may modify these findings
in actual performance settings (61). For example, instructional self-
talk can be harmf ul for expert performers, because relaying specific
performance cues may actively interfere with the automatici ty of the
movement. Furthermor e, some evidence exists that positive self-talk
can result in decreased self-efficacy in some performers (72).
Gener ally, howev er, negativ e self-talk is associated with poor
performance, because it directs one’s focus to inappr opriate cues,
can trigger negativ e emotional energy, and can decrease confidence.
Therefore, in order to emplo y self-talk most effectively, athletes
should begin by examining their current use of self-talk and its
effects on performance. Then, an assessment of the most
appropriate w ay to modi fy their sel f-talk can be made.
498
Goal Setting
Not surprisingl y, many of the concepts discussed in this chapter can
have a direct influence on one another . Self-efficacy is one of these
in that it has a significant impact on the types of goals people set for
themselv es. Those with higher confidence and efficacy gener ally
envision, create, and strive to accompl ish more challenging goals.
Goal setting  can be characteriz ed as a process whereby
progressively challenging standar ds of performance are pursued with
a defined criterion of task performance that increases the likelihood
of perceived success (35). For example, a goal for a swimmer may
be to execute a technical ly correct stroke throughout a sanctioned
distance, such as the 50-meter freestyle. In the beginning, the
swimmer ’s skill level might be so low that such a task would seem
overwhelming and produce a strong sense of failure and frustration,
yet physiologic al testing may show the coach that the athlete has
the physical resour ces to excel at such an event (i.e., the swimmer
has a high degree of fast-twitch, or type II, muscle fibers, exhibi ts
superior muscular power or speed-str ength in the upper and lower
body, and seems to have a high capaci ty for anaer obic metabol ism).
Howev er, the stroke mechanics are inefficient; the athlete is highly
aware of this and therefore lacks confidence. First, the coach and
athlete can break the skill and condi tioning units down into
manageable components (the traditional whole–part –whole method
of learning). Then as the athlete focuses on and masters each
component, a sense of progress and success is nurtur ed, developing
more confidence and better motiv ating the athlete to complete the
challenging goal.
Systematic goal setting can simultaneously increase the
psychological development and performance of the athlete (64). A
number of r easons explain wh y goal set ting af fects perf ormance:
Goals dir ect an athlete’ s attention b y priori tizing ef forts.
Goals increase effort because of the contingency of success on
goal at tainment.
499
Goals increase positive reinforcement through the feedback
given to athletes.
It seems that the informational nature of thoughtf ully derived goals,
which increase effort because they are challenging yet attainable, is
a powerf ul ingr edient in beha vioral change.
Process Goals
An important distinction related to setting goals is the difference
between the process  versus the outcome  (8). Process goals are
those over whose achiev ement the athlete has control. They focus
on the actions the individual must engage in during performance to
execute the skill well. If the effort is expended, success occurs with
a relatively high degree of probabi lity. Examples of process goals
within the skill domain relate to form and technique, although an
individual ly determined time (in the case of a swimmer or track
athlete) could also be consider ed a process goal. An example of a
process goal within strength and condi tioning is to have the athlete
focus on the strategy for weight reduction (e.g., what the athlete
must do on a daily basis, such as aerobic activity and dietary
modifications) rather than on the actual result (e.g., a loss of
weight), thereby increasing a sense of control over actions. With
process goals, suc cess is str ongly contingent on ef fort.
Outcome Goals
On the other hand, outcome goals are ones over which the athlete
has little control; typical ly, winning is the primary focus. Outcome
goals in sport gener ally focus on the competi tive result of an event,
so earning a medal, scoring points, and gener ating a high ranking
would all fall in this category . The accompl ishment of outcome goals
is contingent not only on individual effort but also on the efforts and
abilities of others—something out of the individual’ s personal control.
We believe that winning is a sound goal orientation that can surely
gener ate high levels of motiv ation but that, ironical ly, an athlete can
increase the likelihood of its achiev ement by having both a process
500
and an outcome goal orientation as opposed to a winning-only
attitude. Undue emphasis on winning alone may occupy such a
proportion of fixed attention al capaci ty that it causes narrowing of
attentional focus. As such, task-relevant cues are missed, reaction
time is slowed, and coordination is diminished by forced movements
and compr omised automatici ty, which alter neuromuscular
sequencing— all inhibi ting the at tainment of the desir ed goal.
Both process and outcome goals can be applied to strength and
condi tioning settings as well. For example, emphasizing technique
during the power clean illustrates a process orientation, whereas
focusing only on completing the set illustrates an outcome
orientation. An exception to the gener al caveat about avoiding
outcome goals is the situation in which an athlete is extremely
confident and undermatched in competi tion. He or she may want to
focus solely on outcome and a personal best to maximiz e motiv ation.
Short-Term Goals
In addition to the process and outcome distinction just discussed,
goals can also be categoriz ed as short-term and long-term. Short-
term goals are gener ally those that are directly related to current
training or competi tion and are guidel ines that can be attained in a
relatively short time frame. Short-term goals also increase the
likelihood of success because, although challenging, they are
relatively close to the athlete’ s present ability level. They also
increase confidence, self-efficacy , and motiv ation because of the
likelihood of success. In this regard, short-term process and outcome
goals counteract the boredom and frustration that are potential side
effects of long, ar duous tr aining r egimens.
Long-Term Goals
Howev er, the full meaning of the short-term standar ds of success is
framed by an appropriate long-term goal. Long-term goals  are
those that overarch the series of linked short-term goals. The
attainment of those short-term goals should lead to the
501
accompl ishment of the related long-term goal. The athlete may see
more relevance in everyday practice goals if it is appar ent how they
help attain the ultimate level of performance. For example, a
gymnast who has a long-term goal of winning the floor routine for
the national championship during her senior year may be much more
intense and positive about weight room condi tioning exercises when
she perceives their relevance to her dream. An athlete may be more
aroused psychological ly and physiological ly during practice by the
perception that today’s activity is another step on the ladder to a
personal, long-term dr eam.
Finally, the specificity of the goals— whether short- or long-term—
is important in relation to giving the athlete feedback in effective
coaching. Feedback, or the knowledge of success and failure, is
more effective in the presence of specific, quanti fiable  goals, as
opposed to vague standar ds of performance. Feedback is a
corrective mechanism, like a thermostat or cybernetic device. Both
success and failure can help the athlete stay on course toward long-
term success. For example, a specific goal of 25 minutes of
continuous running in a heart rate range of 160 to 170 beats/min is
a much more engaging objective than “going out for a run.” The
vague phrasing may be fine for a recreational participant, but it is
not helpful for a competi tive cross-country runner , especial ly when
the goal is to dev elop ph ysiological capaci ty.
Optimal goal setting requires knowledge of the exercise sciences
in both the biophysical and behavioral domains. The efficacy of goals
for improving athletic performance lies in their relevance to the
physical needs of the athlete. For example, formulating a series of
appropriate goals to enable a 400-meter runner to decrease his or
her time in the event rests on understanding the physical profile,
relevant metabol ic pathways, and biomechanical technique to be
developed.
Of course, some goals may be completely psychological and
therefore only indirectly performance based. An example of such a
goal is to adopt a positive mood state for an entire practice.
502
Although such goals demand less bioph ysical knowledge, they may
be profoundly useful in increasing performance because they are
goals that an athlete has tremendous control over and can facilitate
inhibi ting habitual negati ve self-talk. Howev er, the most
compr ehensiv e goal-set ting programs encompass several areas of
exercise science in that they might involve goals from any number of
subdiscipl ines, including physiological, metabol ic, biomechanical,
nutrition, and psychological. This requirement uniquely distinguishes
sport psy chology f rom other beha vioral sciences.
In gener al, guidel ines f or goal set ting include the f ollowing:
Long-term goals and short -term goals ar e inter dependent.
Long-term goals provide a sense of meaningf ulness and
direction f or pursuing short -term goals.
The attainment of short-term goals provides a hierarchical
sense of mastery and suc cess that bui lds sel f-confidence.
Athletes should define process goals to focus on elements of
their perf ormance o ver which they ha ve contr ol.
Yips, Choking, Flow, and Clutch
Often coaches struggle with helping athletes with being less anxious when they
compete. Anxiet y can interfere with fluid movement patterns. This is known as the
yips, the twisties , or, during critical moments,  choking . The more technical term is
focal dystonia .
Simone Biles descri bes her twisties as a moment when she started thinking and
lost air awareness and propriocepti on as she rotated during a gymnastics
competi tion (58a). “If I still had my air awareness, and I just was having a bad
day, I would have continued.… But it was more than that.… It’s so danger ous.…
It’s a miracle I landed on my feet.… As soon as I landed that vault, I went and told
my coach that I cannot continue. ” She expressed a deficit mental focus that
created spatial disorientation. Rick Ankiel describes this during his Major League
Basebal l pitching career like this: “I was pitching with fear … That put me into a
freeze mindset, and that’s what led to the yips.” Closely related but distinct,
choking is when focal dystonia happens during a critical time during performance
execution.
Resear chers have suggested that perfectionism, social comparison, and dystonia
are associ ated with choking. Opposed to this experience is the positive emotional
state of flow. Athletes describe flow as effortless movement, complete trust in
503
movements, and remarkable self-contr ol. Caitlin Clark, a basketball player formerly
of the University of Iowa, has said, “It’s not about last year. You worry too much
about the past, you’re going to get caught up in that. It’s about being present.
Being where your feet are.… Be in this moment. ” When this happens during critical
times during a training session or sport, it is consider ed clutch. Purposef ul focus,
optimal emotional control, and high effort describes clutch performances and is
often unpleasant during the event. Several stress management techniques can be
emplo yed to help work toward flow and clutch, including rhythmic breathing,
attentional cuing, and presence-cente red focus. Howev er, the yips and choking
have been linked to the physiological states of fight-or-flight and, in some case,
trauma.  Fight-or-flight refers to the physiological response of perception of threat
that readies the body to defend vigorously or run away. Thus, if athlete s are
experiencing these issues, pr ofessional support is w arranted.
504
Mental Health and Strength and
Conditioning
Mental health  is emerging as an important topic for strength and
condi tioning professionals. Resear ch published related to mental
health and athletes has accelerated from roughly 74 publications in
2003 to over 1,100 in 2023. This growth demonstr ates increased
interest in the topic, but resear ch outcomes support the need to
focus on building competence in strength and condi tioning because
mental health affects performance (24, 62). In a study, student -
athletes were at risk for depression (22.3%), anxiet y (12.5%), and
low self-esteem (8%) (62). While most resear ch has reported higher
rates of positive mental health for athletes compar ed to nonathletes,
training for and playing sports are stressful (31, 47). Some of the
stressors includ e burnout from long hours of training; social identi ty
pressure to perform well; and meeting high expectations from
coaches, teammates, and self while attempting to compete with
other athletes. These stressors can affect mental health and hygiene
that can appear at subcl inical lev els in student -athletes.
What is mental health? Defining mental health encompasses
emotional, psychological, and social well-being (5, 47, 62). Also,
mental health is not just the absence of a mental illness. Challenges
to mental health are often detected when sport, training, and life
challenges disrupt normal self-care behavior. Coaches working with
athletes will have varied backgr ounds related to psychological
distress identi fication and mental health management. Some
practical parameters for coaching education related to mental health
issues ar e needed.
Strength and condi tioning professionals can observ e signs and
symptoms of changing mental health in athletes. While striving to
enhance performance, a holistic athlete monitoring program can
address self-care, recovery, and optimization of psychological,
behavioral, and emotional f actors (5).
505
Strength and condi tioning professionals can view psychological
distress in many ways. One method is for coaches to document
issues in mental health through identi fying signs and symptoms
(table 9.1). Signs are observ able outcomes that can be readily
assessed by the coach. For instance, a sign of depression is the
lessening of effort observ ed by the coach. Symptoms are usually
self-reported feelings or sensations. The symptoms would be the
athlete r eporting that he or she f eels tir ed or has less power .
TABLE 9.1  Signs and Symptoms of Anxiety,
Depression, and Stress
Signs Symptoms Distinctive factors
Anxiet y Rapid ey e
movement
Rapid speech
Sweating
Racing heart r ate
Shaking or
tapping wi th
fingers or toes
Sleep pr oblemsFeeling restless, wound
up, on edge, or irri table
Easily fatigued
Difficulty concentr ating
Gastrointestinal somatic
symptoms
Difficulty contr olling
feelings of worry
Feelings of impending
doom or being out of
control
Feeling sel f-conscious or
avoiding si tuationsCircular thinking,
rumination, worry
Depression Depressed mood
Sleep disruption
Decreased
movement or
coordination
Agitation
Social isolationChange in appeti te
Feelings of gui lt
Gastrointestinal somatic
symptoms
Hypochondriasis
Rumination about the
pastLow ener gy or mood,
hopelessness, and
helplessness
Stress Racing heart r ate
Agitation
Sleep disturbanceConcerns about meeting
high standar ds
Concerns about social
obligationsUrgency or heightened
arousal
Adapted from Beisecker et al. (2024); Gusta vson et al. (2018); Knowles et al. (2021);
Rogers et al. (2024); W eber et al. (2023).
506
Signs Symptoms Distinctive factors
Inability to
recover
Appeti te changes
Impulsiv e decision
makingConcerns about w asting
time
Concerns about weight
Trouble making
decisions
Trouble r elaxing
Being lonely
Adapted from Beisecker et al. (2024); Gusta vson et al. (2018); Knowles et al. (2021);
Rogers et al. (2024); W eber et al. (2023).
A clear understanding of similarities and differences between
mental states can be useful. It is important to note that several
nuances of anxiet y exist and can include gener al anxiet y disorder,
social anxiet y, panic disorders, and phobias. Anxiet y often presents
as a circular pattern of thoughts and feelings of heightened
importance known as ruminations  and worry . Some predisposing
factors for anxiet y include large social and schedule adjustments, a
biological family history of anxiet y, negativ e life events, early trauma,
and shyness in childhood (6, 62). Lists of signs and symptoms of
anxiet y, depression, and stress in athletes are in table 9.1. These
manifest in varied somatic, cogni tive, and behavioral symptoms.
Often maladaptiv e coping and perceptions of impending outcomes or
doom fill the individual with urgency , overwhelming feelings of
dread, and focus on negati ve consequences. By the end of this
section, strength and condi tioning professionals will be able to
identi fy signs and symptoms of anxiet y, depression, and stress;
recogniz e the appropriate means of support; and develop an
appreciation of the impact of mental health on performance and
injury risk.
Depression and anxiet y can share signs and symptoms. These
include agitation, somatic complaints (e.g., stomach aches or sweat y
palms), restles sness, social withdrawal, difficulty thinking,  and sleep
disturbance. These represent cogni tive processing biases that can
lead to rumination and worry (26). What sets depression apart is
507
anhedonia (lack of emotion), feelings of hopele ssness or
helplessness, and low energy (26). Studies have identi fied that
depression can begin with poor performance, injury , concussion,
social comparisons, high expectations, and changes in social or
playing status (26, 31). Also affecting depression are changes in
feedback from coaches, behavioral deactiv ation, negativ e self-
perceptions, evaluations, and feelings of helplessness or
hopelessness. Stress is an imbalance between the demand s of a task
or situation and the ability to cope with the challenge,  as stated
earlier in this chapter . Chronic stress often interferes with sleep,
mood, and self-care habits. Because mental stress is unique to each
individual, it has many signs and symptoms. The most recognizable
signs of str ess include ur gency , agitation, and hurried speech.
Now that these states have been identi fied, how do coaches help
athletes get the appropriate  support? One helpful way is a three-
step process that follows the content of Weinber g and Gould (64)
while adding the assessment of duration and disruption from more
traditional psychological evaluation. First, identi fy the signs and
symptoms of distress related to affect, behavior, and cogni tions.
Second, determ ine the duration of distress (lasting greater than 2-3
weeks) and potential disruption (e.g., sleep patterns, nutritional
habits, social relationships). Specifically, is the distress tempor ary or
persistent, and how will it affect behaviors outside of sports? Third,
determine how to support the athlete. A question could follow: Is it
important to refer the athlete for more support, allow the athlete
time for self-reflection, or collaborate with the athlete to work on
centering or environmental management to change disruptiv e
performance-r elated r esponses?
The first step in identi fying psychological signs of distress is
classifying the affect, behavior, and cogni tions (ABCs) observ ed in
athletes (11, 64, 65). Affect refers to the mood and emotions seen in
and reported by the athlete . For instance, an athlete might look
anxious, have a stressed face, report feeling hopeless, or have a
persistent negativ e expression. Behavior refers to movements like
508
nervous pacing, fidgeting, slow reactions, and rapid eye tracking.
Cogni tions are thoughts reported, negativ e worry about
performances or outcomes, overgener alizing, catastr ophizing, and
doubts about abilities or past failures. A brief review of cogni tions
that can disrupt performances are all-or-nothing thinking, jumping to
conclusions, magnification, minimization, emotional reasoning, and
confirmation bias (5, 22).
Once these signs are observ ed, step 2 is to determine if the issue
is temporary or persistent. To determine what level of help is
required for an athlete, coaches need to learn how the signs and
symptoms of distress affect performance and when and how to refer
to a pr ofessional who is tr ained to handle psy chological distr ess.
This third step, referral to a qualified support professional,
requires the coach to work in an individual setting with the athlete to
develop a plan to refer to a support professional, who should be
consul ted or contacted ahead of time. This remains a key skill to
assist athletes with self-care for mental health and as an important
step for coaches. A performance coach or consul tant is trained in
implementing psychological skills that are attention based and do
not enter into interpersona l or clinical issues. For example, a
performance coach or consul tant (usual ly certified through the
Association of Applied Sport Psychology as a certified mental
performance consul tant [CMPC]) emplo ys goal setting, imagery , self-
talk, attentional focus, or other psychological skills to direct effort
and attention. A counselor is licensed by the state and is usually
trained to help with interpersonal, cultural, and mental health issues.
For example, if an athlete needs a counselor , interpersonal and self-
care can become a focus of cogni tive behavioral treatment. Also
licensed by the state, a psychologist is trained to administer
psychological testing batteries, focusing on interpersonal and self-
care issues to work wi th chr onic mental heal th issues.
The Mental Health Case Studies  sidebar discusses different issues
coaches encounter and highlights the referral process. When issues
relate to performance of low motiv ation and effort, coaching cues
509
are often given. Howev er, when the athlete demonstr ates persistent
(two to three weeks) negativ e affect, cogni tion, or behaviors,
referral for more support to a counselor or psychologist may be
needed. Also, if the behavior becomes disruptiv e to other teammates
or training partners, the coach is tasked with assessing the situation,
making a judgment related to management of the athlete’ s behavior,
and deciding how best to address or support the athlete toward
positive beha viors.
In the future, challenges to mental health in athletics could also
come from social media; name, image, and likeness (NIL); and
tempor ary commi tments or lack of identi fication with a program
facilitated by the college transfer portal. Thus, a higher level of social
comparison and self-esteem challenges will likely be stressors for
athletes. Imperative to the preparation for future strength and
condi tioning professionals will be skill building and resour ces related
to these emer ging chal lenges.
When subclinical anxiet y, depression, or stress are seen by the
coach, a plan can be made to change behavior, team environment,
and emotional management. Subcl inical issues include low-level and
short-term mental or emotional distress that are not serious enough
to affect athletes’ personal, academic, and social roles. These often
do not last longer than a week and do not disrupt sleep, eating, and
social functioning. Howev er, when persistent issues or disruptions
become more chronic and severe, a professional referral to a mental
health special ist is clearly warranted. When more chronic issues
arise, the coach should seek support of the sports medicine staff
(e.g., athletic trainers, nutritionists, team physicians) as well as the
mental health communi ty in a respectf ul way (maintaining
confidential ity, dignity, and communication with the athlete), so
prioritizing mental well-being is the first goal. By developing a
reference list of professionals in the school, surrounding communi ty,
or athletic department, the strength and condi tioning professional
can be bet ter pr epared for mental heal th issues should they arise.
510
Social norms and the environment should be consider ed when
helping an athlete seek mental health support. Athlete s in team
sports may wish to have privacy while getting support. Because
social stigmas and mental health treatment can sometimes clash,
the strength and condi tioning professional should attempt to be
aware of individual preferences and readiness for suppo rt. Not all
mental health issues are covered in this chapter (e.g., substance
abuse, eating  disorders, bullying or hazing, body dysmorphia,
gender identi ty, social phobias, and trauma) so further education is
recommended for strength and condi tioning professionals as they
work wi th div erse populations of athletes.
Mental Health Case Studies
The strength and condi tioning professional can use the list of signs and symptoms
of anxiet y, depression, and stress found in table 9.1 (page 182) to frame how each
athlete is feeling (step 1), then determ ine how long and how critical those signs
and symptoms are to the athlete (step 2), and decide a course of action to refer
the athlete to the appr opriate support pr ofessional (step 3).
Case Study 1
Tanner has been swimming all summer and feels tired and demotiv ated. He is a
high school junior , ready for his senior  year, and feels like his friends are too busy
to spend time with him. This has lasted for one week. He reports that no matter
how hard he tries, he cannot get better. During workouts he reports not wanting to
swim anymore. His workout effort is decreasing, but he still completes all sets. He
paces in the water between sets and looks uncomf ortable. Socially, he has not
been talking to his friends during workouts but reports a good social life outside of
the str ength and condi tioning pr ogramming.
Step 1: Signs and Symptoms
Pacing, reduced effort, lack of social interactions during the workouts, and
decreased ef fort and motiv ation
Step 2: Duration and Disruption
One week in dur ation, not af fecting things outside of sport
Step 3: Referral Source
Performance coach or consul tant
Case Study 2
511
Jenny has been training to get better at volleybal l but on her college team has
good competi tion. She nervously fidgets with her hands before drills and often
reacts without concerns for form or accuracy. Also, she will storm out of the gym
when her emotions  get the best of her. This has been occurring for three months.
She is a dedicated athlete in the strength program. Often she feels less talented
compar ed to her peers and pushes herself to prove everyone wrong about her
nonscholarship status. At night, she often worries about her choices, her ability,
and her friendships. This has caused her to lose sleep, averaging about three to
four hours a night. She also starts missing workouts due to oversleeping and
performs poorly in coordination drills. When approached about her effort, she gets
defensive and lea ves training.
Step 1: Signs and Symptoms
Fidgets and storms out of the gym, missing work outs, o versleeping
Step 2: Duration and Disruption
Three months; it seems to be disrupt ing other aspects of her life such as social
relationships or sleep
Step 3: Referral Source
Counselor
Case Study 3
Meisha is a 15-year-old softbal l player who is very outgoing. She is happy but can
be too intense for her teammates. They report her mood as very aggressive and
confrontational. This has been an issue for the last month. Wanting attention,
Meisha often wants to talk about leading drills, wants to be the first in line, and
talks loudly . Her relationships, sleep, and self-care seem good, but lately friends
have started to call her less. She wants to learn more about goal setting and self-
talk so she can get stronger in the off-season. Coaches report several girls on the
team have reported  that her mood is creating an issue on the team such that
teammates are starting to feel uncomfortable. Meisha reports feeling social ly
isolated and sad about this dev elopment.
Step 1: Signs and Symptoms
Loud talking, aggr essive, feeling uncomf ortable wi th being social ly disengaged
Step 2: Duration and Disruption
One month, social ly disruptiv e, not af fecting beha vior outside of sports
Step 3: Referral Source
Performance coach or consul tant
Case Study 4
Alex is a high school senior who cannot seem to find his position on the soccer
team. His mood keeps getting worse . This has been happening for the last six
512
weeks. His friends are worried about his continued drop in mood, and he has
started missing school. When asked about his motiv ation and plans for soccer, he
says he has no idea and he does not really care anymore. It is clear he is starting
to get worse with his self-care, and he stops shaving. His friends have noticed him
vaping after school, and he is starting to fall behind during running drills. Recently,
his teammates ha ve tried to help but ar e starting to get worried.
Step 1: Signs and Symptoms
Missing pr actices and school, mood, and decr eased motiv ation
Step 2: Duration and Disruption
Six weeks, disrupting social r elationships and sel f-care
Step 3: Referral Source
Counselor or psy chologist
513
Psychological Impact of Injury in Sport
To enhance athletic performance and decrease the risk and severity
of future injury , strength and condi tioning professionals need to build
some basic skills. Injuries are challenging setbacks many athletes
face during their careers (39). Whether athletes work through a
minor setback (e.g., a muscle strain or adjusting to a new season) or
a career-ending injury , the impact on an athlete’ s psychological
health and performance is significantly affected. Among the
cogni tive responses, athlete s may experience recurrent intrusiv e
thoughts, decreased self-esteem, and lower ed athletic identity
(identi fication and self-worth from sport participation) (14).
Additional ly, an athlete’ s emotional response will vary throughout the
injury rehabi litation process. They will feel a spectrum of negativ e
emotions and behaviors such as anger , fear, confusion, depression,
helplessness, unreasonable fear of reinjury , denial of injury severity,
and extreme guilt (1, 14). As the strength and conditioning
professional spends more time with the injured athlete throughout
the rehabilitative process, attempts to help develop a culture of
athlete safety and support throughout the return-to-pla y process are
designed to lessen fear and enhance motiv ation (59). With the
emerging issues of concussion protocols and increased awareness of
lingering ef fects f rom mor e severe injuries, str ength and condi tioning
professionals should work to help prevent further distress to the
athletes they serv e.
To better support the athlete during this transition, it is essential
to understand how psychological factors may affect an athlete
during the pr e- and post -injury timel ine.
Psychological Factors That Can Predispose
an Athlete to Injury
Resear ch has suggested that a variety of psychological factors can
help explain the predisposi tion of athletes suffering an injury (68).
514
The stress and injury model is a theoretical framework that attempts
to explain the effects of pre-injury psychological factors on athletic
injury (3). Revised by Williams and Andersen (68), the model
suggests that three unique factors can influence an athlete’ s stress
response, separ ately or together , contributing to an athlete ’s risk and
frequency of injury ( figure 9.4). It includes athletes’
personal ity factors such as state or trait anxiet y levels, mood
states, and per ceived locus of contr ol of si tuations and ev ents;
history of stressors such as life events, academic stressors,
daily hassles, and pr evious injury history; and
coping resour ces such as social support, stress management
techniques, mental ski lls, and nutri tional and l ifestyle habi ts.
When a potential ly stressful athletic situation occurs during
training, practice, or competi tion, these factors may affect how
athletes respon d to the situation, either positively or negativ ely. For
example, an athlete with a history of high stress, a perfectionistic
personal ity, and anxiet y is likely to negativ ely evaluate an injury . In
this case, the situation is more stressful and the athlete will likely
exhibi t greater physiological activation and attentional concerns as
compar ed to individuals with opposi te characteristics (68). Fear of
reinjury , anxiet y or rumination about playing status, and inadequate
performance compar ed to previous standar ds are commo n thoughts
expressed by injured athletes (14, 59, 60). Appropriate interv entions
that involve techniques such as cogni tive restructuring (e.g.,
reframing negativ e thinking patterns), and relaxation techniques
(e.g., deep nasal breathing or visual ization) can positively influence
the stress response and mitigate the risk of future injury (3).
Conversely , a resilient athlete (one who has overcome past injuries
and has coping skills and social support) will likely have better
adher ence to rehabi litation programs and more positive outcomes
(68, 69).
515
FIGURE 9.4  The str ess and injury model.
Adapted by permission from J.M. Williams and M.B. Andersen, “Psychosocial Antecedents of Sport Injury: Review and
Critique of the Stress and Injury Model,” Journal of Applied Sport Psychology 10, no. 1 (1998): 5-25, reprinted by
permission of the publisher (Taylor & Francis Ltd, http://www.tandfonline.com).
Psychological Factors That Can Affect an
Athlete After Injury
Psychological concerns emerge throughout the process of injury
recovery and often include timelines of rehabi litation to return to
training and competi tion. Athletes must process a variety of conflicts
once an injury has been sustained, including attending to and
listening to the body, tending  to the pain versus pushing through the
pain, and interpersonal challenges and conflicts with teammates.
Also, injuries can be a challenge to an athlete’ s identi ty and concerns
about time left in the season  or his or her career and falling behind
teammates (60). Proper management of their relative effort and
intensi ty to avoid future reinjury becomes a primary goal. Pushing
through pain and injury may be falsely viewed as heroic and
expected b y teammates, par ents, coaches, and f ans (63).
The Cogni tive Appraisal Model (66) proposes four key components
that may influe nce how athletes judge their injury and how it affects
their emotional and recovery response due to injury (figure 9.5). By
understanding this model, strength and condi tioning professionals
can offer more support and guidance to help athletes return to their
preexisting confidence and perf ormance lev els.
516
Personal Factors
The psychological impact of an injury on an athlete can be very
specific to each individual. Strength and condi tioning professionals
can better understand how athletes will respond to injury by
understanding these k ey personal f actors:
History of injury . Is this injury acute or chronic? Has the
athlete experienced this injury bef ore?
Athletic identi ty. Does the athlete highly identi fy as an athlete
and look to others for acknow ledgment of that role? According
to a 2022 study, almost 40% of student -athletes have a high
athletic identi ty, strongly serving as a foundation of their self-
worth (2).
Personal ity. Is the athlete naturally confident and outgoing or
introverted? Do they chronical ly worry about what they cannot
accompl ish or perf orm?
Pain tolerance. How well does the athlete tolerate discomf ort
during tr aining and r ehabi litation?
Coping skills. How has the athlete managed stressful situations
in the past? Do they engage in positive (e.g., regular physical
activity or relaxation strategies) or negativ e (e.g., risky
activities or a voidant beha viors) coping str ategies?
Age and sex. Does the athlete have specific concerns due to
their age (e.g., transportatio n) or sex (biological differences
such as ener gy availability or hormonal di fferences)?
517
FIGURE 9.5  The cogni tive appr aisal model.
Reprinted by permission from D.M. Wiese-bjornstal, A.M. Smith, S.M. Shaffer, and M.A. Morrey, “An Integrated Model
of Response to Sport Injury: Psychological and Sociological Dynamics,” Journal of Applied Sport Psychology 10, no. 1
(1998): 46-69, reprinted by permission of the publisher (Taylor & Francis Ltd, http://www.tandfonline.com).
Situational Factors
In addition to personal factors, variabi lity in environmental factors
can influence how athletes view their injury and their return to sport,
including the f ollowing:
Sport type. Is it individual or team based? Is there a high risk
of reinjury based on the sport?
Level of competi tion. Is this a high school athlete or a
professional athlete?
Social support . Is the athlete surrounded by friends, family,
and teammates for emotio nal and social support? Social
support helps one learn that they are valued and supported
regardless of athletic performance or the identi ty as a
competi tive athlete (63).
Sports medicine team. Does the athlete have proper access to
a professional r ehabi litative team?
518
Rehabi litation environment . Similarly, where is the athlete
rehabi litating their injury? Does it require a length y commute?
Is it adequate f or proper sport -speci fic mo vements?
Coach influence . Does the sport coach actively support the
athlete during the rehab process? Is there pressure to return
as soon as possible with the athlete fearing losing his or her
position? Coaches should be attentiv e to the possibi lity that
athletes could be struggl ing with challenges related to conflicts
with coaches who may not understand the extent of their
injuries; suggest that they are weak; and may explicitly
minimiz e, invalidate, or dismiss the athlete’ s struggles (60).
Behavioral Responses
Consider how the athlete behaves when facing the impact of injury
on his or her heal th and perf ormance:
Adher ence to rehabi litation . Does the athlete demons trate
consistency and commi tment to the activ e process?
Use of psychological skills. Are techniques such as goal
setting, imager y, and visual ization integr ated to improve their
recovery timel ine?
Effort and intensi ty. How does the athlete’ s level of motiv ation
change o ver time?
Malingering . Does the athlete exacerba te pain or readiness
levels to avoid future responsibi lities or changes in their
timeline?
Risk-taking . Does the athlete engage in activities that have not
yet been cleared for participation? Do they avoid certain
activities because they f eel they ar e not y et ready to perf orm?
Emotional Responses
Strength and condi tioning professionals can become aware of the
emotional responses that athletes may experience during the return-
to-pla y process, including the f ollowing:
519
Injury-related fear. How does the athlete embrace progressive
overload into mor e sport -speci fic mo vements?
Tension, anger, depression . Has the injury created conflict
within the athlete’ s normal activities of daily living and sports
participation?
Frustr ation and boredom . Is the rehabi litation process  mental ly
engaging and motiv ating?
Grief. Was there a loss in a specific competi tion or season? Did
the athlete lose his or her position or formal role with the team
due to the injury?
Positive outlook . Does the athlete view this setback as an
opportuni ty to r ebuild and impr ove?
From the lens of a strength and condi tioning professional,
athletes’ responses to injury  are subjectiv e and multifaceted. It is
likely that mental and physical readiness do not occur at the same
rate. The psychological impact of an injury on an athlete influences
more than weight room or athletic performance. For example, in a
study of over 100 Division I American footbal l players, academic
stress (during regular examination periods) was associated with a
significant increase in physical injuries (36). By understanding the
pre- and post-injury psychological implications on mental and
physical performance, strength and condi tioning professionals can
remain important members of the high-perf ormance team and help
develop a mor e robust and r esilient athlete in the f uture.
What Strength and Conditioning
Professionals Can Do to Help
As an integral member of the high-perf ormance team, strength and
condi tioning professionals can continue to provide the necessary
social, emotional, and physical support required for athlet es (7, 45).
Effective communication between sport coaches, strength and
condi tioning professionals, and sports medicine staff is imper ative for
520
developing a culture that prioritizes athlete safety and maximiz es
performance (59).
Regular Communication With All Stakeholders
Strength and condi tioning professionals should maintain regular
communication with all athletic trainers, position coaches, parents (if
appropriate), and head coaches. During the initial stage of injury
rehabi litation, the strength and condi tioning professional might
contribute minimal ly to the rehab process. To ensur e optimal
transitions between phases of the rehabi litation program, the
strength and condi tioning professional should be aware of the
training completed at the front end of the process. The sports
medicine team can ensur e their involvement is sequential and
concurr ent to prevent the risk of progressing too quickly and
possibly reinjuring (59). Additional ly, strength and conditioning
professionals should maintain the injured athlete’ s privacy and
confidential ity throughout the r eturn-to-pla y process.
Specifically Tailored Training Programs
Depending on the severity of the injury , athletes could require a
modified training program that may require different exercises,
tempos, equipment, or arrangements (e.g., smaller, more
personal ized settings). If the time and resour ces allow it, every effort
should be made to customiz e the training program to accommodate
the athlete’ s curr ent abi lities and l imitations.
Proper Goal Setting and Acknowledgment of Training
Milestones
During a length y return-to-pla y timeline, setbacks, frustration, and
lack of expedient progress are common. Coaches may consider
overlapping appropriate goal-setting techniques with the sports
medicine team to encour age and motiv ate the athlete. Goals should
be relevant to controllable factors (e.g., Did I come to training? Did I
perform ten repetitions?) and be flexible to prevent frustration from
unexpected adjustments (63).
521
Progressive Integration Into Full-Group or Team
Activities
One of the most basic psychological needs to enhance intrinsic
motiv ation is relatedness, or a sense of belonging and connection
(46). Progressively moving from privately scheduled, one-on-one
rehabi litation sessions to larger team sessions may be an
appropriate tactic to enhance the connection between the athlete
and the team.
Improve Self-Efficacy and Motivation
Readiness to return to competi tion is a highly subjectiv e and
complex process. Characteristics of athletes who are ready to return
to play demonstr ate realistic expectations, high levels of self-efficacy ,
and low levels of anxiet y (18). Coaches should minimiz e
psychological barriers such as fear or anxiet y by providing a
psychological ly safe and autonom y-supportiv e environment.
Additional ly, enhancing the athlete’ s self-efficacy about specific tasks
(e.g., sprinting, jumping, cutting) and motiv ation to return to pre-
injury levels would create a more intrinsical ly driven, process-
oriented approach compar ed to an extrinsical ly driven, outcome-
oriented appr oach to r eturn to pla y (63).
522
Enhancing Motor Skill Acquisition and
Learning
A comprehens ive understand ing of the impact and value of sport
psychology on athletic performance is not complete without a
working knowledge of the overlap of motor skill acquisi tion and
learning topics . The integr ation of motor skill acquisi tion will improve
both the athletes’ performan ce and the ability of those who coach
them. Selected techniques to enhance motor skill learning are
discussed in the next sections, including those pertaining to practice
schedule, instructions, and feedback. While resear ch demonstr ates
favorable outcomes for particular techniques, it is important to
consider the unique abilities of the athlete, the task, and the
environment. What may facilitate learning for one athlete may have
a different effect on another . The following sections can thus serve
as a basic guide that can be tailored to the needs of the athlete, the
task, and the en vironment.
Learning–Performance Distinction
Before considering techniques to enhance motor skill learning, it is
important to recogniz e the learning–perf ormance distinction.
Learning is a process that results in a relatively permanent change in
the capability to perform a motor skill (50). Performance is the
execution of the skill in the current environment (29). Performance
can be affected by arousal, motiv ation, and numer ous other factors
and therefore may not be indicativ e of the skill capabi lities of the
individual (9). While the techniques discussed here will facilitate skill
learning of the individual, some might actual ly lead to performance
decrements during the practice session. It is imper ative to recogniz e
this possibi lity and not assum e that an athlete’ s performance during
a given practice session r eflects his or her learning of the giv en ski ll.
523
Practice Schedule
Practice is essential for motor skill learning. More importantly ,
challenging practice enables motor skill acquisi tion; mere repetitions
alone are not enough to change behavior (43). One of the many
ways to facilitate skill learning is through the manipulation of the
practice structur e and schedule.
Whole Versus Part Practice
With respect to teaching a complex motor skill, there is debate about
the effectiveness of whole versus part practice. Whole practice
addresses the skill in its entirety, whereas part practice  separ ates
the skill into a series of subco mponents. As a gener al rule, tasks that
are challenging but have low interr elatedness of the subcomponents
are learned better with part practice (40). For example, the snatch is
a skilled power movement that can be broken down  into four
subcomponents: the first pull, transition, second pull, and catch. On
the other hand, whole practice would tend to be favored for a task
with subcomponents that are highly interr elated, because part
practice can inhibi t the effective regrouping of the subcomponents
(40). In the instance of a lunge, it would be ineffective to separ ate
the movements of the front leg from the movements of the lead leg,
because these two components are highly interr elated. Therefore, a
lunge would be better learned as a whole. Regardless of the task
interr elatedness, in instances in which the skill may be danger ous or
costly to learn as a whole, part pr actice is the f avored choice.
Internal and External Cues for Coaching
Feedback
The best coaching cues use the fewest words but make the greatest impact.
Sometimes gestur es or single words can be effective. It is important to stay brief
with either motiv ation or instruction-r elated feedback during training sessions. If
not, coach es tend to overcoach, a process known as verbal overshadowing , which
can disrup t fluid motions by introducin g cogni tive processing. Athletes with limited
experience may need time to experiment and learn to move and self-correct during
524
training. Often coaches are anxious to prevent injury , and overcoaching can disrupt
the self-exploration process. By overcoaching, the athlete cannot self-correct, an
important part of autonomous learning. Cues can be internal (“breathe, ” “eyes up,”
“back straight, ” “heels on the floor”) and external (“push through the floor,” “try to
pull down on the bar as you come up from the squat, ” “make a letter C with your
elbows as y ou rack the bar in the power clean”).
By focusin g attention, coaches describe the mental intensi ty and effort needed
for the specific technique. For example, lifting coach Gayle Hatch uses cues to
teach stiff arms and trapezius contractions during the initial pull phase of the clean
movement by saying, “When the elbows bend, the power ends” (G. Hatch,
personal communication. March 15, 2007). Likewise, the cues for procedur al
movements and speed for the jerk movement can include “Dip and drive.” These
represent technique and motiv ational cues. In the first instance, the instructions
use external cues to enhance the lifting technique. In the second example, the
coach uses motiv ational words to represent speed and intensi ty. Resear ch has
suggested that early in learning, external cues can be very effective. As the
movements become  refined and minor  technique corrections are needed, internal
cues ma y be mor e appr opriate (76).
If part practice is to be used, a task can be separ ated into
subcomponents in numer ous ways. Segmentation  breaks down the
task into a series of subcomponents that have clear breaks between
them (66). For example, as mentioned previously , the snatch can be
broken down into the first pull, the transition, the second pull, and
the catch. Fractionalization  breaks the tasks into subcomponents
that occur simultaneously (66). In performing the push press, the
athlete practice s the press motion of the arms and the push motion
of the legs independently . Simplification  adjusts the difficulty of
the tasks by changing task characteristics such as the execution
speed or the equipment used (66). In the snatch, the athlete first
practices the subcomponents with a PVC pipe (or similar dowel rod).
In this instance, both segmentation and f ractional ization ar e used.
When teaching the subcomponents of the task, multiple methods
can be used to integr ate the parts back into the whole skill. Pure-
part training  (also known as the part–whole  method) has the
athlete practice each subcomponent of the skill multiple times
independently . After all components have been practiced, the skill is
practiced in its entirety (66). In a snatch, the first pull is practiced,
525
then the transition, followed by the second pull, and ending with the
catch. After all skills have been practiced multiple times, the snatch
is practiced. Progressive-part training  has the athlete practice
the first two parts in isolation before practicing these parts together
(66). The athlete then practices the third subcomponent before
practicing all three parts together . In the snatch, the athlete first
practices the first pull and then the transition, then the first pull with
the transition. The athlete then practices the second pull before
practicing the first pull, transition, and second pull as a combined
skill. This progression continues until the whole skill has been
reintegr ated. Repetitive part training  has the athlete practice
only the first part in isolation; then each subsequent part is added
until the whole task is reintegr ated (66). The athlete in this instance
would first practice the first pull; then the first pull with the
transition; then the first pull, transition, and second pull; and so
forth. With use of simplification, characteristics of the task can be
added gradual ly, increasing the difficulty of the task. The choice of
sequencing will depend on the task and the goals of the given
training session.
Random Practice
Traditional ly, skills are practiced in a blocked fashion, such that the
athlete practices the same skill multiple times before progressing to
another skill. In random practice, multiple skills are practiced in a
random order during a given practice session. For example, during
blocked practice, the athlete performs multiple squat depth jumps
before progressing to another skill. In random practice, an athlete
may perform a squat depth  jump, a depth jump with a lateral
movement, a split squat jump, and a side-to-side push-of f in a
random order. The athlete continues to repeat these skills in a
random order. While performance on each individual skill initially
declines during random practice, learning is facilitated by this
practice design (53). When applied in a sport setting, an integr ation
of blocked and random practice (a few repetitive attempts at each
526
skill before proceeding) maximiz es the benefi ts of both practice
schedules (32). In the instance of the jumps, the athlete would
perform a few repetitions of the squat depth jump before moving on
to another mo vement such as the side-to-side push-of f.
Variable Practice
Similar to random practice, variable practice  includes variations of
the same skill within a single  practice session as opposed to specific
practice in which a specific skill (i.e., depth jump to secon d box of a
specific height ) is repeated multiple times. In variable practice, the
athlete would practice stepping from and jumping to boxes of
varying heights. Similar to random practice, variable practice can
impair performance during the practice session but can enhance
performance on a novel variation of a skill (33) such as the ability to
quickly jump to a second box after stepping off a box from an
unpracticed height. A combination of specific and variable practice
allows the athlete to develop sport-speci fic skills while also providing
the athlete with the flexibi lity to perform in unfamiliar contexts (33).
This flexibility is important to an athlete’ s success, because sport
requires the athlete to perform in unfamiliar environments (travel
games) and to accurately modify a practice skill in response to an
opponent. As an example, training to land from and jump to varying
heights will allow the athlete to respond in a game and execute the
skill in an unf amiliar context.
Observational Learning
Observational practice  (action  obser vation), or practice through
observ ation of the task or skill to be performed, has important
implications for motor skill learning. Observ ational practice
frequently uses prerecorded videos or live demonstr ations. The
individual executing the observed skill can be a novice or a
competent or expert performer . When physical practice is combined
with observational practice, learning is enhanced (52). In a strength
and condi tioning setting, partner work can facilitate learning. As one
527
athlete completes a lift or a drill, the other athlete can observ e
during his or her rest period and vice versa. Sakadjian and
colleagues (49) found that observ ational practice combined with
physical practice facilitated improved power clean technique as
compar ed to physical practice alone. Observ ational practice can
assist athletes in achieving the desired technique, thus maintaining
athlete safety and allowing for a more rapid progression to heavier
lifting.
Instructions
A coach can facilitate learning by varying the amount of detail
provided in the instruction to the athletes’ strongest learning style.
Instructional styles can be divided into explicit instructions, guided
discovery, and discovery. Explicit instru ctions  include prescriptive
information that gives the athlete the “rules” for effectively executing
the given task. In learning a squat, the athlete receives detailed
instructions about the specific body position throughout the
movement as well as the type (e.g., flexion–extension) and amount
of movement at each of the joints. Guided discovery  provides the
athlete with instructions about the overall movement goal and
important prompts for task accompl ishment without explicitly telling
the athlete how to accompl ish the task. The athlete is told the goal
of the squat depth jump and a few key reminders to prevent injury ,
such as maintaining a neutral spine. This style provides some
direction while allowing the athlete to explor e relationships between
the executed movement patterns and the associated movement
goal. Finally, discovery  instructs the athlete on the overarching goal
of the task and the athlete receives little to no direction. In this
instance the athlete is just told to squat to a particular depth and is
allowed to explor e methods  to accompl ish this task. A discovery
instructional style can slow the learning process, while explicit
instructions can impair performance in a stressful environment (56).
The decreased attentional demands of discovery and guided
528
discovery instructional styles allow athletes to increase their focus on
the task -relevant cues r elated to task ex ecution (75).
Feedback
Feedback plays a significant role in motor skill acquisi tion by
providing the athlete with information about the movement pattern
and the associated goal. This information can then be used to make
appropriate adjustments to achiev e the desired movement pattern
and goal. Intrinsic feedback  is feedback provided to the athlete by
the athlete from the senses—f or example, sensory information about
missing a box during a squat box jump. Integration of the sensory
information allows the athlete to fine-tune and adjust the movement
pattern to produce the desired movement and associated task goal.
Augmented feedback  is feedback provided to the athlete by either
an observ er, such as a coach, or technology , such as video or
laboratory equipment. After the squat box jump, a coach can tell the
athlete that the hips’ countermo vement was too slow, resulting in
missing the bo x.
The remainder of this section focuses on augmented feedback.
Augmented feedback can be broken down into knowledge  of results
and knowledge of performance. Knowledge of results  provides
the athlete with information about the execution of the task goal.
For example, with a T-drill, the coach can tell the athlete how quickly
he or she completed the drill. The athlete can also be given
normativ e information about how this time compar es with others.
Both positive normativ e feedback and feedback without comparison
augment skill learning compar ed to negativ e normativ e feedback
(34). Knowledge of performance  feedba ck provides the athlete
with information about his or her movement pattern. This can be
delivered in the form of video analysis or through the use of
special ized laboratory equipment such as a force plate. In the
instance of the T-drill, the coach gives the athlet e specific
information about the movement during the T-test such as body
position during changes of direction. When the task goal is a
529
movement outcome—f or example, proper form on a power clean—
there is an overlap between knowledge of results and knowledge of
performance and thus they can become one and the same.
The timing and frequency of feedback also influence learning
outcomes. Feedback that is offered concurr ently with the task
enhances performance while impairing learning; therefore, this
feedback is beneficial in a competi tion setting (69). Howev er,
feedback that is provided after task execution facilitates skill learning
(69). This feedback can be provided either after every trial or after a
series of trials. While decreased frequency impairs performance
during practice, less frequent feedback enhances skill acquisi tion as
compar ed to feedback after every trial (70), except in instances in
which the skill is complex (74). Therefore, in initial skill learning it
would be beneficial to provide more frequent feedback that
decreases as athletes pr ogress in their ski ll level.
Feedback can be used to facilitate both learning and
performance. The timing and frequency of the feed back
have different influences on performance and learning.
While concur rent feedbac k is beneficial for competition,
delayed feed back that is initially frequent and decreases
with time will facilitate learning of complex move ment
patterns.
530
Conclusion
Although a scienti fic and motiv ational ly sound coaching program can
greatly help in the development of athletes, several other
complementary psychologica l techniques can enhance their overall
effectiveness. In reality, most athletes probably have had both
adaptiv e and maladaptiv e experiences in the form of countless
practices and competi tions and, as a result, have developed a more
or less effective mental skills repertoir e. A working understanding of
some of the psychological principles and tools for the gener ation of
cogni tive–beha vioral change included in this chapter may help
facilitate impr oved perf ormance and an enhanced qual ity of life.
The coach and athlete can each contribute to improved
performance outcomes and increase the enjoyment of competi tion
by attending to the psychological aspects of instruction and
performance. A positive, goal-oriented coaching approach is one of
the most powerf ul contributors to psychological preparation for
sport. The physical and nutritional preparation of the athlete
represents the foundation on which performance potential is based,
and the role of psychology is to mental ly manage the developed
physical resour ces (i.e., strength, speed, flexibi lity, and skill), thereby
allowing the athlete to achiev e his or her potential on a more
consistent basis. Additional ly, an adequate understand ing of the
mind–body relationship , as reflected in the constructs of this chapter ,
can facilitate communication between the strength and conditioning
professional and the athlete and aid the athlete in controlling and
managing emotion, arousal, focus, and motiv ation. Using
appropriate psychological techniques can help this self-management
process. The experience of success in sport may be impor tant in and
of itself, but the greater outcome of improved mental skills use to
enhance self-esteem, confide nce, and positive self-concep t improves
the qual ity of life in gener al.
KEY TERMS
531
achiev ement motiv ation
anxiet y
arousal
athletic identi ty
attention
augmented f eedback
autogenic tr aining
catastr ophe theory
cogni tive anxiet y
counter condi tioning
diaphr agmatic br eathing
discovery
distress
drive theory
emotions
eustress
explicit instructions
extrinsic motiv ation
fight-or-flight
flow
focal dystonia
fractional ization
goal set ting
guided disco very
ideal perf ormance state
imagery
individual z ones of optimal f unctioning
intrinsic f eedback
intrinsic motiv ation
inverted-U theory
knowledge of perf ormance
knowledge of r esults
long-term goals
mental heal th
532
mental imagery
motiv ation
motiv e to achiev e success (MA S)
motiv e to a void failure (MAF)
negativ e punishment
negativ e reinforcement
observ ational pr actice
operant
outcome goals
part pr actice
physiological ef ficiency
positive punishment
positive reinforcement
process goals
progressive muscle r elaxation (PMR)
progressive-part tr aining
psychological ef ficiency
pure-part tr aining
random pr actice
readiness
repetitive part tr aining
reversal theory
routine
segmentation
selectiv e attention
self-confidence
self-contr olled pr actice
self-efficacy
self-talk
short-term goals
simplification
somatic anxiet y
sport psy chology
state anxiet y
533
stress
stressor
systematic desensi tization (SD)
trait anxiet y
variable pr actice
whole pr actice
STUDY QUESTIONS
  1.  Which of the f ollowing is the best defini tion of mental heal th?
  a.  the abi lity to perf orm wel l under pr essure and a void
emotional expr ession
  b.  a state of emotional, psy chological, and social wel l-being
  c.  the absence of an y diagnosed mental i llness
  d.  a personal ity trait that dictates an athlete’ s motiv ation
status
  2.  What is the first step in identi fying psychological signs of
distress in an athlete?
  a.  referring the athlete to a mental heal th professional
  b.  asking the athlete to complete a standar dized mood
questionnair e
  c.  moni toring the athlete’ s training load and r ecovery scor es
  d.  classi fying the athlete’ s affect, beha vior, and cogni tions
  3.  Which of the following is the distinguishing factor of
depression f rom anxiet y?
  a.  hopelessness or helplessness
  b.  rumination
  c.  worry
  d.  cir cular thinking
  4.  Predisposing psychologic al factors to injury include all the
following ex cept which option?
  a.  history of str essors
  b.  violent outbursts
  c.  personal ity
534
  d.  coping r esour ces
  5.  Which of the following best describes a key person al factor
that can influence how an athlete psychological ly responds to
an injury?
  a.  type of sport that the athlete competes in
  b.  availability of a pr ofessional r ehabi litative team
  c.  athlete’ s history of pr evious injuries and coping
mechanisms
  d.  athlete’ s competi tive experience
535