# Section 9.5

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 9: Psychological Foundations of Performance

**Section:** 9.5 -- Attention and Focus

**PDF Pages:** 511--520

Social norms and the environment should be consider ed when
helping an athlete seek mental health support. Athlete s in team
sports may wish to have privacy while getting support. Because
social stigmas and mental health treatment can sometimes clash,
the strength and condi tioning professional should attempt to be
aware of individual preferences and readiness for suppo rt. Not all
mental health issues are covered in this chapter (e.g., substance
abuse, eating  disorders, bullying or hazing, body dysmorphia,
gender identi ty, social phobias, and trauma) so further education is
recommended for strength and condi tioning professionals as they
work wi th div erse populations of athletes.
Mental Health Case Studies
The strength and condi tioning professional can use the list of signs and symptoms
of anxiet y, depression, and stress found in table 9.1 (page 182) to frame how each
athlete is feeling (step 1), then determ ine how long and how critical those signs
and symptoms are to the athlete (step 2), and decide a course of action to refer
the athlete to the appr opriate support pr ofessional (step 3).
Case Study 1
Tanner has been swimming all summer and feels tired and demotiv ated. He is a
high school junior , ready for his senior  year, and feels like his friends are too busy
to spend time with him. This has lasted for one week. He reports that no matter
how hard he tries, he cannot get better. During workouts he reports not wanting to
swim anymore. His workout effort is decreasing, but he still completes all sets. He
paces in the water between sets and looks uncomf ortable. Socially, he has not
been talking to his friends during workouts but reports a good social life outside of
the str ength and condi tioning pr ogramming.
Step 1: Signs and Symptoms
Pacing, reduced effort, lack of social interactions during the workouts, and
decreased ef fort and motiv ation
Step 2: Duration and Disruption
One week in dur ation, not af fecting things outside of sport
Step 3: Referral Source
Performance coach or consul tant
Case Study 2
511
Jenny has been training to get better at volleybal l but on her college team has
good competi tion. She nervously fidgets with her hands before drills and often
reacts without concerns for form or accuracy. Also, she will storm out of the gym
when her emotions  get the best of her. This has been occurring for three months.
She is a dedicated athlete in the strength program. Often she feels less talented
compar ed to her peers and pushes herself to prove everyone wrong about her
nonscholarship status. At night, she often worries about her choices, her ability,
and her friendships. This has caused her to lose sleep, averaging about three to
four hours a night. She also starts missing workouts due to oversleeping and
performs poorly in coordination drills. When approached about her effort, she gets
defensive and lea ves training.
Step 1: Signs and Symptoms
Fidgets and storms out of the gym, missing work outs, o versleeping
Step 2: Duration and Disruption
Three months; it seems to be disrupt ing other aspects of her life such as social
relationships or sleep
Step 3: Referral Source
Counselor
Case Study 3
Meisha is a 15-year-old softbal l player who is very outgoing. She is happy but can
be too intense for her teammates. They report her mood as very aggressive and
confrontational. This has been an issue for the last month. Wanting attention,
Meisha often wants to talk about leading drills, wants to be the first in line, and
talks loudly . Her relationships, sleep, and self-care seem good, but lately friends
have started to call her less. She wants to learn more about goal setting and self-
talk so she can get stronger in the off-season. Coaches report several girls on the
team have reported  that her mood is creating an issue on the team such that
teammates are starting to feel uncomfortable. Meisha reports feeling social ly
isolated and sad about this dev elopment.
Step 1: Signs and Symptoms
Loud talking, aggr essive, feeling uncomf ortable wi th being social ly disengaged
Step 2: Duration and Disruption
One month, social ly disruptiv e, not af fecting beha vior outside of sports
Step 3: Referral Source
Performance coach or consul tant
Case Study 4
Alex is a high school senior who cannot seem to find his position on the soccer
team. His mood keeps getting worse . This has been happening for the last six
512
weeks. His friends are worried about his continued drop in mood, and he has
started missing school. When asked about his motiv ation and plans for soccer, he
says he has no idea and he does not really care anymore. It is clear he is starting
to get worse with his self-care, and he stops shaving. His friends have noticed him
vaping after school, and he is starting to fall behind during running drills. Recently,
his teammates ha ve tried to help but ar e starting to get worried.
Step 1: Signs and Symptoms
Missing pr actices and school, mood, and decr eased motiv ation
Step 2: Duration and Disruption
Six weeks, disrupting social r elationships and sel f-care
Step 3: Referral Source
Counselor or psy chologist
513
Psychological Impact of Injury in Sport
To enhance athletic performance and decrease the risk and severity
of future injury , strength and condi tioning professionals need to build
some basic skills. Injuries are challenging setbacks many athletes
face during their careers (39). Whether athletes work through a
minor setback (e.g., a muscle strain or adjusting to a new season) or
a career-ending injury , the impact on an athlete’ s psychological
health and performance is significantly affected. Among the
cogni tive responses, athlete s may experience recurrent intrusiv e
thoughts, decreased self-esteem, and lower ed athletic identity
(identi fication and self-worth from sport participation) (14).
Additional ly, an athlete’ s emotional response will vary throughout the
injury rehabi litation process. They will feel a spectrum of negativ e
emotions and behaviors such as anger , fear, confusion, depression,
helplessness, unreasonable fear of reinjury , denial of injury severity,
and extreme guilt (1, 14). As the strength and conditioning
professional spends more time with the injured athlete throughout
the rehabilitative process, attempts to help develop a culture of
athlete safety and support throughout the return-to-pla y process are
designed to lessen fear and enhance motiv ation (59). With the
emerging issues of concussion protocols and increased awareness of
lingering ef fects f rom mor e severe injuries, str ength and condi tioning
professionals should work to help prevent further distress to the
athletes they serv e.
To better support the athlete during this transition, it is essential
to understand how psychological factors may affect an athlete
during the pr e- and post -injury timel ine.
Psychological Factors That Can Predispose
an Athlete to Injury
Resear ch has suggested that a variety of psychological factors can
help explain the predisposi tion of athletes suffering an injury (68).
514
The stress and injury model is a theoretical framework that attempts
to explain the effects of pre-injury psychological factors on athletic
injury (3). Revised by Williams and Andersen (68), the model
suggests that three unique factors can influence an athlete’ s stress
response, separ ately or together , contributing to an athlete ’s risk and
frequency of injury ( figure 9.4). It includes athletes’
personal ity factors such as state or trait anxiet y levels, mood
states, and per ceived locus of contr ol of si tuations and ev ents;
history of stressors such as life events, academic stressors,
daily hassles, and pr evious injury history; and
coping resour ces such as social support, stress management
techniques, mental ski lls, and nutri tional and l ifestyle habi ts.
When a potential ly stressful athletic situation occurs during
training, practice, or competi tion, these factors may affect how
athletes respon d to the situation, either positively or negativ ely. For
example, an athlete with a history of high stress, a perfectionistic
personal ity, and anxiet y is likely to negativ ely evaluate an injury . In
this case, the situation is more stressful and the athlete will likely
exhibi t greater physiological activation and attentional concerns as
compar ed to individuals with opposi te characteristics (68). Fear of
reinjury , anxiet y or rumination about playing status, and inadequate
performance compar ed to previous standar ds are commo n thoughts
expressed by injured athletes (14, 59, 60). Appropriate interv entions
that involve techniques such as cogni tive restructuring (e.g.,
reframing negativ e thinking patterns), and relaxation techniques
(e.g., deep nasal breathing or visual ization) can positively influence
the stress response and mitigate the risk of future injury (3).
Conversely , a resilient athlete (one who has overcome past injuries
and has coping skills and social support) will likely have better
adher ence to rehabi litation programs and more positive outcomes
(68, 69).
515
FIGURE 9.4  The str ess and injury model.
Adapted by permission from J.M. Williams and M.B. Andersen, “Psychosocial Antecedents of Sport Injury: Review and
Critique of the Stress and Injury Model,” Journal of Applied Sport Psychology 10, no. 1 (1998): 5-25, reprinted by
permission of the publisher (Taylor & Francis Ltd, http://www.tandfonline.com).
Psychological Factors That Can Affect an
Athlete After Injury
Psychological concerns emerge throughout the process of injury
recovery and often include timelines of rehabi litation to return to
training and competi tion. Athletes must process a variety of conflicts
once an injury has been sustained, including attending to and
listening to the body, tending  to the pain versus pushing through the
pain, and interpersonal challenges and conflicts with teammates.
Also, injuries can be a challenge to an athlete’ s identi ty and concerns
about time left in the season  or his or her career and falling behind
teammates (60). Proper management of their relative effort and
intensi ty to avoid future reinjury becomes a primary goal. Pushing
through pain and injury may be falsely viewed as heroic and
expected b y teammates, par ents, coaches, and f ans (63).
The Cogni tive Appraisal Model (66) proposes four key components
that may influe nce how athletes judge their injury and how it affects
their emotional and recovery response due to injury (figure 9.5). By
understanding this model, strength and condi tioning professionals
can offer more support and guidance to help athletes return to their
preexisting confidence and perf ormance lev els.
516
Personal Factors
The psychological impact of an injury on an athlete can be very
specific to each individual. Strength and condi tioning professionals
can better understand how athletes will respond to injury by
understanding these k ey personal f actors:
History of injury . Is this injury acute or chronic? Has the
athlete experienced this injury bef ore?
Athletic identi ty. Does the athlete highly identi fy as an athlete
and look to others for acknow ledgment of that role? According
to a 2022 study, almost 40% of student -athletes have a high
athletic identi ty, strongly serving as a foundation of their self-
worth (2).
Personal ity. Is the athlete naturally confident and outgoing or
introverted? Do they chronical ly worry about what they cannot
accompl ish or perf orm?
Pain tolerance. How well does the athlete tolerate discomf ort
during tr aining and r ehabi litation?
Coping skills. How has the athlete managed stressful situations
in the past? Do they engage in positive (e.g., regular physical
activity or relaxation strategies) or negativ e (e.g., risky
activities or a voidant beha viors) coping str ategies?
Age and sex. Does the athlete have specific concerns due to
their age (e.g., transportatio n) or sex (biological differences
such as ener gy availability or hormonal di fferences)?
517
FIGURE 9.5  The cogni tive appr aisal model.
Reprinted by permission from D.M. Wiese-bjornstal, A.M. Smith, S.M. Shaffer, and M.A. Morrey, “An Integrated Model
of Response to Sport Injury: Psychological and Sociological Dynamics,” Journal of Applied Sport Psychology 10, no. 1
(1998): 46-69, reprinted by permission of the publisher (Taylor & Francis Ltd, http://www.tandfonline.com).
Situational Factors
In addition to personal factors, variabi lity in environmental factors
can influence how athletes view their injury and their return to sport,
including the f ollowing:
Sport type. Is it individual or team based? Is there a high risk
of reinjury based on the sport?
Level of competi tion. Is this a high school athlete or a
professional athlete?
Social support . Is the athlete surrounded by friends, family,
and teammates for emotio nal and social support? Social
support helps one learn that they are valued and supported
regardless of athletic performance or the identi ty as a
competi tive athlete (63).
Sports medicine team. Does the athlete have proper access to
a professional r ehabi litative team?
518
Rehabi litation environment . Similarly, where is the athlete
rehabi litating their injury? Does it require a length y commute?
Is it adequate f or proper sport -speci fic mo vements?
Coach influence . Does the sport coach actively support the
athlete during the rehab process? Is there pressure to return
as soon as possible with the athlete fearing losing his or her
position? Coaches should be attentiv e to the possibi lity that
athletes could be struggl ing with challenges related to conflicts
with coaches who may not understand the extent of their
injuries; suggest that they are weak; and may explicitly
minimiz e, invalidate, or dismiss the athlete’ s struggles (60).
Behavioral Responses
Consider how the athlete behaves when facing the impact of injury
on his or her heal th and perf ormance:
Adher ence to rehabi litation . Does the athlete demons trate
consistency and commi tment to the activ e process?
Use of psychological skills. Are techniques such as goal
setting, imager y, and visual ization integr ated to improve their
recovery timel ine?
Effort and intensi ty. How does the athlete’ s level of motiv ation
change o ver time?
Malingering . Does the athlete exacerba te pain or readiness
levels to avoid future responsibi lities or changes in their
timeline?
Risk-taking . Does the athlete engage in activities that have not
yet been cleared for participation? Do they avoid certain
activities because they f eel they ar e not y et ready to perf orm?
Emotional Responses
Strength and condi tioning professionals can become aware of the
emotional responses that athletes may experience during the return-
to-pla y process, including the f ollowing:
519
Injury-related fear. How does the athlete embrace progressive
overload into mor e sport -speci fic mo vements?
Tension, anger, depression . Has the injury created conflict
within the athlete’ s normal activities of daily living and sports
participation?
Frustr ation and boredom . Is the rehabi litation process  mental ly
engaging and motiv ating?
Grief. Was there a loss in a specific competi tion or season? Did
the athlete lose his or her position or formal role with the team
due to the injury?
Positive outlook . Does the athlete view this setback as an
opportuni ty to r ebuild and impr ove?
From the lens of a strength and condi tioning professional,
athletes’ responses to injury  are subjectiv e and multifaceted. It is
likely that mental and physical readiness do not occur at the same
rate. The psychological impact of an injury on an athlete influences
more than weight room or athletic performance. For example, in a
study of over 100 Division I American footbal l players, academic
stress (during regular examination periods) was associated with a
significant increase in physical injuries (36). By understanding the
pre- and post-injury psychological implications on mental and
physical performance, strength and condi tioning professionals can
remain important members of the high-perf ormance team and help
develop a mor e robust and r esilient athlete in the f uture.
What Strength and Conditioning
Professionals Can Do to Help
As an integral member of the high-perf ormance team, strength and
condi tioning professionals can continue to provide the necessary
social, emotional, and physical support required for athlet es (7, 45).
Effective communication between sport coaches, strength and
condi tioning professionals, and sports medicine staff is imper ative for
520