# Section 9.6

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 9: Psychological Foundations of Performance

**Section:** 9.6 -- Psychological Techniques

**PDF Pages:** 521--535

developing a culture that prioritizes athlete safety and maximiz es
performance (59).
Regular Communication With All Stakeholders
Strength and condi tioning professionals should maintain regular
communication with all athletic trainers, position coaches, parents (if
appropriate), and head coaches. During the initial stage of injury
rehabi litation, the strength and condi tioning professional might
contribute minimal ly to the rehab process. To ensur e optimal
transitions between phases of the rehabi litation program, the
strength and condi tioning professional should be aware of the
training completed at the front end of the process. The sports
medicine team can ensur e their involvement is sequential and
concurr ent to prevent the risk of progressing too quickly and
possibly reinjuring (59). Additional ly, strength and conditioning
professionals should maintain the injured athlete’ s privacy and
confidential ity throughout the r eturn-to-pla y process.
Specifically Tailored Training Programs
Depending on the severity of the injury , athletes could require a
modified training program that may require different exercises,
tempos, equipment, or arrangements (e.g., smaller, more
personal ized settings). If the time and resour ces allow it, every effort
should be made to customiz e the training program to accommodate
the athlete’ s curr ent abi lities and l imitations.
Proper Goal Setting and Acknowledgment of Training
Milestones
During a length y return-to-pla y timeline, setbacks, frustration, and
lack of expedient progress are common. Coaches may consider
overlapping appropriate goal-setting techniques with the sports
medicine team to encour age and motiv ate the athlete. Goals should
be relevant to controllable factors (e.g., Did I come to training? Did I
perform ten repetitions?) and be flexible to prevent frustration from
unexpected adjustments (63).
521
Progressive Integration Into Full-Group or Team
Activities
One of the most basic psychological needs to enhance intrinsic
motiv ation is relatedness, or a sense of belonging and connection
(46). Progressively moving from privately scheduled, one-on-one
rehabi litation sessions to larger team sessions may be an
appropriate tactic to enhance the connection between the athlete
and the team.
Improve Self-Efficacy and Motivation
Readiness to return to competi tion is a highly subjectiv e and
complex process. Characteristics of athletes who are ready to return
to play demonstr ate realistic expectations, high levels of self-efficacy ,
and low levels of anxiet y (18). Coaches should minimiz e
psychological barriers such as fear or anxiet y by providing a
psychological ly safe and autonom y-supportiv e environment.
Additional ly, enhancing the athlete’ s self-efficacy about specific tasks
(e.g., sprinting, jumping, cutting) and motiv ation to return to pre-
injury levels would create a more intrinsical ly driven, process-
oriented approach compar ed to an extrinsical ly driven, outcome-
oriented appr oach to r eturn to pla y (63).
522
Enhancing Motor Skill Acquisition and
Learning
A comprehens ive understand ing of the impact and value of sport
psychology on athletic performance is not complete without a
working knowledge of the overlap of motor skill acquisi tion and
learning topics . The integr ation of motor skill acquisi tion will improve
both the athletes’ performan ce and the ability of those who coach
them. Selected techniques to enhance motor skill learning are
discussed in the next sections, including those pertaining to practice
schedule, instructions, and feedback. While resear ch demonstr ates
favorable outcomes for particular techniques, it is important to
consider the unique abilities of the athlete, the task, and the
environment. What may facilitate learning for one athlete may have
a different effect on another . The following sections can thus serve
as a basic guide that can be tailored to the needs of the athlete, the
task, and the en vironment.
Learning–Performance Distinction
Before considering techniques to enhance motor skill learning, it is
important to recogniz e the learning–perf ormance distinction.
Learning is a process that results in a relatively permanent change in
the capability to perform a motor skill (50). Performance is the
execution of the skill in the current environment (29). Performance
can be affected by arousal, motiv ation, and numer ous other factors
and therefore may not be indicativ e of the skill capabi lities of the
individual (9). While the techniques discussed here will facilitate skill
learning of the individual, some might actual ly lead to performance
decrements during the practice session. It is imper ative to recogniz e
this possibi lity and not assum e that an athlete’ s performance during
a given practice session r eflects his or her learning of the giv en ski ll.
523
Practice Schedule
Practice is essential for motor skill learning. More importantly ,
challenging practice enables motor skill acquisi tion; mere repetitions
alone are not enough to change behavior (43). One of the many
ways to facilitate skill learning is through the manipulation of the
practice structur e and schedule.
Whole Versus Part Practice
With respect to teaching a complex motor skill, there is debate about
the effectiveness of whole versus part practice. Whole practice
addresses the skill in its entirety, whereas part practice  separ ates
the skill into a series of subco mponents. As a gener al rule, tasks that
are challenging but have low interr elatedness of the subcomponents
are learned better with part practice (40). For example, the snatch is
a skilled power movement that can be broken down  into four
subcomponents: the first pull, transition, second pull, and catch. On
the other hand, whole practice would tend to be favored for a task
with subcomponents that are highly interr elated, because part
practice can inhibi t the effective regrouping of the subcomponents
(40). In the instance of a lunge, it would be ineffective to separ ate
the movements of the front leg from the movements of the lead leg,
because these two components are highly interr elated. Therefore, a
lunge would be better learned as a whole. Regardless of the task
interr elatedness, in instances in which the skill may be danger ous or
costly to learn as a whole, part pr actice is the f avored choice.
Internal and External Cues for Coaching
Feedback
The best coaching cues use the fewest words but make the greatest impact.
Sometimes gestur es or single words can be effective. It is important to stay brief
with either motiv ation or instruction-r elated feedback during training sessions. If
not, coach es tend to overcoach, a process known as verbal overshadowing , which
can disrup t fluid motions by introducin g cogni tive processing. Athletes with limited
experience may need time to experiment and learn to move and self-correct during
524
training. Often coaches are anxious to prevent injury , and overcoaching can disrupt
the self-exploration process. By overcoaching, the athlete cannot self-correct, an
important part of autonomous learning. Cues can be internal (“breathe, ” “eyes up,”
“back straight, ” “heels on the floor”) and external (“push through the floor,” “try to
pull down on the bar as you come up from the squat, ” “make a letter C with your
elbows as y ou rack the bar in the power clean”).
By focusin g attention, coaches describe the mental intensi ty and effort needed
for the specific technique. For example, lifting coach Gayle Hatch uses cues to
teach stiff arms and trapezius contractions during the initial pull phase of the clean
movement by saying, “When the elbows bend, the power ends” (G. Hatch,
personal communication. March 15, 2007). Likewise, the cues for procedur al
movements and speed for the jerk movement can include “Dip and drive.” These
represent technique and motiv ational cues. In the first instance, the instructions
use external cues to enhance the lifting technique. In the second example, the
coach uses motiv ational words to represent speed and intensi ty. Resear ch has
suggested that early in learning, external cues can be very effective. As the
movements become  refined and minor  technique corrections are needed, internal
cues ma y be mor e appr opriate (76).
If part practice is to be used, a task can be separ ated into
subcomponents in numer ous ways. Segmentation  breaks down the
task into a series of subcomponents that have clear breaks between
them (66). For example, as mentioned previously , the snatch can be
broken down into the first pull, the transition, the second pull, and
the catch. Fractionalization  breaks the tasks into subcomponents
that occur simultaneously (66). In performing the push press, the
athlete practice s the press motion of the arms and the push motion
of the legs independently . Simplification  adjusts the difficulty of
the tasks by changing task characteristics such as the execution
speed or the equipment used (66). In the snatch, the athlete first
practices the subcomponents with a PVC pipe (or similar dowel rod).
In this instance, both segmentation and f ractional ization ar e used.
When teaching the subcomponents of the task, multiple methods
can be used to integr ate the parts back into the whole skill. Pure-
part training  (also known as the part–whole  method) has the
athlete practice each subcomponent of the skill multiple times
independently . After all components have been practiced, the skill is
practiced in its entirety (66). In a snatch, the first pull is practiced,
525
then the transition, followed by the second pull, and ending with the
catch. After all skills have been practiced multiple times, the snatch
is practiced. Progressive-part training  has the athlete practice
the first two parts in isolation before practicing these parts together
(66). The athlete then practices the third subcomponent before
practicing all three parts together . In the snatch, the athlete first
practices the first pull and then the transition, then the first pull with
the transition. The athlete then practices the second pull before
practicing the first pull, transition, and second pull as a combined
skill. This progression continues until the whole skill has been
reintegr ated. Repetitive part training  has the athlete practice
only the first part in isolation; then each subsequent part is added
until the whole task is reintegr ated (66). The athlete in this instance
would first practice the first pull; then the first pull with the
transition; then the first pull, transition, and second pull; and so
forth. With use of simplification, characteristics of the task can be
added gradual ly, increasing the difficulty of the task. The choice of
sequencing will depend on the task and the goals of the given
training session.
Random Practice
Traditional ly, skills are practiced in a blocked fashion, such that the
athlete practices the same skill multiple times before progressing to
another skill. In random practice, multiple skills are practiced in a
random order during a given practice session. For example, during
blocked practice, the athlete performs multiple squat depth jumps
before progressing to another skill. In random practice, an athlete
may perform a squat depth  jump, a depth jump with a lateral
movement, a split squat jump, and a side-to-side push-of f in a
random order. The athlete continues to repeat these skills in a
random order. While performance on each individual skill initially
declines during random practice, learning is facilitated by this
practice design (53). When applied in a sport setting, an integr ation
of blocked and random practice (a few repetitive attempts at each
526
skill before proceeding) maximiz es the benefi ts of both practice
schedules (32). In the instance of the jumps, the athlete would
perform a few repetitions of the squat depth jump before moving on
to another mo vement such as the side-to-side push-of f.
Variable Practice
Similar to random practice, variable practice  includes variations of
the same skill within a single  practice session as opposed to specific
practice in which a specific skill (i.e., depth jump to secon d box of a
specific height ) is repeated multiple times. In variable practice, the
athlete would practice stepping from and jumping to boxes of
varying heights. Similar to random practice, variable practice can
impair performance during the practice session but can enhance
performance on a novel variation of a skill (33) such as the ability to
quickly jump to a second box after stepping off a box from an
unpracticed height. A combination of specific and variable practice
allows the athlete to develop sport-speci fic skills while also providing
the athlete with the flexibi lity to perform in unfamiliar contexts (33).
This flexibility is important to an athlete’ s success, because sport
requires the athlete to perform in unfamiliar environments (travel
games) and to accurately modify a practice skill in response to an
opponent. As an example, training to land from and jump to varying
heights will allow the athlete to respond in a game and execute the
skill in an unf amiliar context.
Observational Learning
Observational practice  (action  obser vation), or practice through
observ ation of the task or skill to be performed, has important
implications for motor skill learning. Observ ational practice
frequently uses prerecorded videos or live demonstr ations. The
individual executing the observed skill can be a novice or a
competent or expert performer . When physical practice is combined
with observational practice, learning is enhanced (52). In a strength
and condi tioning setting, partner work can facilitate learning. As one
527
athlete completes a lift or a drill, the other athlete can observ e
during his or her rest period and vice versa. Sakadjian and
colleagues (49) found that observ ational practice combined with
physical practice facilitated improved power clean technique as
compar ed to physical practice alone. Observ ational practice can
assist athletes in achieving the desired technique, thus maintaining
athlete safety and allowing for a more rapid progression to heavier
lifting.
Instructions
A coach can facilitate learning by varying the amount of detail
provided in the instruction to the athletes’ strongest learning style.
Instructional styles can be divided into explicit instructions, guided
discovery, and discovery. Explicit instru ctions  include prescriptive
information that gives the athlete the “rules” for effectively executing
the given task. In learning a squat, the athlete receives detailed
instructions about the specific body position throughout the
movement as well as the type (e.g., flexion–extension) and amount
of movement at each of the joints. Guided discovery  provides the
athlete with instructions about the overall movement goal and
important prompts for task accompl ishment without explicitly telling
the athlete how to accompl ish the task. The athlete is told the goal
of the squat depth jump and a few key reminders to prevent injury ,
such as maintaining a neutral spine. This style provides some
direction while allowing the athlete to explor e relationships between
the executed movement patterns and the associated movement
goal. Finally, discovery  instructs the athlete on the overarching goal
of the task and the athlete receives little to no direction. In this
instance the athlete is just told to squat to a particular depth and is
allowed to explor e methods  to accompl ish this task. A discovery
instructional style can slow the learning process, while explicit
instructions can impair performance in a stressful environment (56).
The decreased attentional demands of discovery and guided
528
discovery instructional styles allow athletes to increase their focus on
the task -relevant cues r elated to task ex ecution (75).
Feedback
Feedback plays a significant role in motor skill acquisi tion by
providing the athlete with information about the movement pattern
and the associated goal. This information can then be used to make
appropriate adjustments to achiev e the desired movement pattern
and goal. Intrinsic feedback  is feedback provided to the athlete by
the athlete from the senses—f or example, sensory information about
missing a box during a squat box jump. Integration of the sensory
information allows the athlete to fine-tune and adjust the movement
pattern to produce the desired movement and associated task goal.
Augmented feedback  is feedback provided to the athlete by either
an observ er, such as a coach, or technology , such as video or
laboratory equipment. After the squat box jump, a coach can tell the
athlete that the hips’ countermo vement was too slow, resulting in
missing the bo x.
The remainder of this section focuses on augmented feedback.
Augmented feedback can be broken down into knowledge  of results
and knowledge of performance. Knowledge of results  provides
the athlete with information about the execution of the task goal.
For example, with a T-drill, the coach can tell the athlete how quickly
he or she completed the drill. The athlete can also be given
normativ e information about how this time compar es with others.
Both positive normativ e feedback and feedback without comparison
augment skill learning compar ed to negativ e normativ e feedback
(34). Knowledge of performance  feedba ck provides the athlete
with information about his or her movement pattern. This can be
delivered in the form of video analysis or through the use of
special ized laboratory equipment such as a force plate. In the
instance of the T-drill, the coach gives the athlet e specific
information about the movement during the T-test such as body
position during changes of direction. When the task goal is a
529
movement outcome—f or example, proper form on a power clean—
there is an overlap between knowledge of results and knowledge of
performance and thus they can become one and the same.
The timing and frequency of feedback also influence learning
outcomes. Feedback that is offered concurr ently with the task
enhances performance while impairing learning; therefore, this
feedback is beneficial in a competi tion setting (69). Howev er,
feedback that is provided after task execution facilitates skill learning
(69). This feedback can be provided either after every trial or after a
series of trials. While decreased frequency impairs performance
during practice, less frequent feedback enhances skill acquisi tion as
compar ed to feedback after every trial (70), except in instances in
which the skill is complex (74). Therefore, in initial skill learning it
would be beneficial to provide more frequent feedback that
decreases as athletes pr ogress in their ski ll level.
Feedback can be used to facilitate both learning and
performance. The timing and frequency of the feed back
have different influences on performance and learning.
While concur rent feedbac k is beneficial for competition,
delayed feed back that is initially frequent and decreases
with time will facilitate learning of complex move ment
patterns.
530
Conclusion
Although a scienti fic and motiv ational ly sound coaching program can
greatly help in the development of athletes, several other
complementary psychologica l techniques can enhance their overall
effectiveness. In reality, most athletes probably have had both
adaptiv e and maladaptiv e experiences in the form of countless
practices and competi tions and, as a result, have developed a more
or less effective mental skills repertoir e. A working understanding of
some of the psychological principles and tools for the gener ation of
cogni tive–beha vioral change included in this chapter may help
facilitate impr oved perf ormance and an enhanced qual ity of life.
The coach and athlete can each contribute to improved
performance outcomes and increase the enjoyment of competi tion
by attending to the psychological aspects of instruction and
performance. A positive, goal-oriented coaching approach is one of
the most powerf ul contributors to psychological preparation for
sport. The physical and nutritional preparation of the athlete
represents the foundation on which performance potential is based,
and the role of psychology is to mental ly manage the developed
physical resour ces (i.e., strength, speed, flexibi lity, and skill), thereby
allowing the athlete to achiev e his or her potential on a more
consistent basis. Additional ly, an adequate understand ing of the
mind–body relationship , as reflected in the constructs of this chapter ,
can facilitate communication between the strength and conditioning
professional and the athlete and aid the athlete in controlling and
managing emotion, arousal, focus, and motiv ation. Using
appropriate psychological techniques can help this self-management
process. The experience of success in sport may be impor tant in and
of itself, but the greater outcome of improved mental skills use to
enhance self-esteem, confide nce, and positive self-concep t improves
the qual ity of life in gener al.
KEY TERMS
531
achiev ement motiv ation
anxiet y
arousal
athletic identi ty
attention
augmented f eedback
autogenic tr aining
catastr ophe theory
cogni tive anxiet y
counter condi tioning
diaphr agmatic br eathing
discovery
distress
drive theory
emotions
eustress
explicit instructions
extrinsic motiv ation
fight-or-flight
flow
focal dystonia
fractional ization
goal set ting
guided disco very
ideal perf ormance state
imagery
individual z ones of optimal f unctioning
intrinsic f eedback
intrinsic motiv ation
inverted-U theory
knowledge of perf ormance
knowledge of r esults
long-term goals
mental heal th
532
mental imagery
motiv ation
motiv e to achiev e success (MA S)
motiv e to a void failure (MAF)
negativ e punishment
negativ e reinforcement
observ ational pr actice
operant
outcome goals
part pr actice
physiological ef ficiency
positive punishment
positive reinforcement
process goals
progressive muscle r elaxation (PMR)
progressive-part tr aining
psychological ef ficiency
pure-part tr aining
random pr actice
readiness
repetitive part tr aining
reversal theory
routine
segmentation
selectiv e attention
self-confidence
self-contr olled pr actice
self-efficacy
self-talk
short-term goals
simplification
somatic anxiet y
sport psy chology
state anxiet y
533
stress
stressor
systematic desensi tization (SD)
trait anxiet y
variable pr actice
whole pr actice
STUDY QUESTIONS
  1.  Which of the f ollowing is the best defini tion of mental heal th?
  a.  the abi lity to perf orm wel l under pr essure and a void
emotional expr ession
  b.  a state of emotional, psy chological, and social wel l-being
  c.  the absence of an y diagnosed mental i llness
  d.  a personal ity trait that dictates an athlete’ s motiv ation
status
  2.  What is the first step in identi fying psychological signs of
distress in an athlete?
  a.  referring the athlete to a mental heal th professional
  b.  asking the athlete to complete a standar dized mood
questionnair e
  c.  moni toring the athlete’ s training load and r ecovery scor es
  d.  classi fying the athlete’ s affect, beha vior, and cogni tions
  3.  Which of the following is the distinguishing factor of
depression f rom anxiet y?
  a.  hopelessness or helplessness
  b.  rumination
  c.  worry
  d.  cir cular thinking
  4.  Predisposing psychologic al factors to injury include all the
following ex cept which option?
  a.  history of str essors
  b.  violent outbursts
  c.  personal ity
534
  d.  coping r esour ces
  5.  Which of the following best describes a key person al factor
that can influence how an athlete psychological ly responds to
an injury?
  a.  type of sport that the athlete competes in
  b.  availability of a pr ofessional r ehabi litative team
  c.  athlete’ s history of pr evious injuries and coping
mechanisms
  d.  athlete’ s competi tive experience
535