# Section 10.2

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 10: Basic Nutritional Factors Affecting Health

**Section:** 10.2 -- Standard Nutrition Guidelines

**PDF Pages:** 543--555

Standard Nutrition Guidelines
For general nutrition information, strength and conditioning
professionals may want to refer their athletes to MyPlate , a food
guidance system created by the U.S. Department of Agricul ture in
2011 and based on the Dietary Guidel ines for Americans to help
consumers make better food choices (100). MyPlate icon illustrates
the five food groups based on a mealtime visual, the place setting
(figure 10.1). Another helpful resour ce geared more toward athletes
is the Performance Enhancing Plate from the Collegiate and
Professional Sports Dietitians Association (CPSDA, www.sportsr d
.org). This plate encourages athletes on hard training days to make
half their plate whole grains to fuel muscles, followed by 1/4 of the
plate f rom fruits and v egetables and the other 1/4 f rom pr oteins.
MyPlate Guideline s and Recommendations
Information related to MyPlate can be found at www.myplate .gov.
Although the basic guidel ines represented by the MyPlate icon and
corresponding educational materials are universal, they include
calorie guide lines and portion recommendations for fruits,
vegetables, grains, protein foods, and dairy and fortified soy
alternativ es, based on age and sex for individuals who get less than
30 minutes of moder ate physical activity most days, as noted in
tables 10.1 to 10.6 on pages 221 through 226. Those who are more
physical ly active should adjust the guidel ines to meet their specific
dietary needs (143). Additional key nutritional topics for MyPlate
include guidel ines for oils, added sugars, saturated fats, sodium, and
alcohol. Oils are not a food group but provide important nutrients
such as mono- and polyun saturated fats and vitamin E. Added
sugars are sugars and syrups that are added to foods or beverages
when they are made. To build healthy eating habits and stay within
calorie needs, people over age 2 should eat foods and drink
beverages with little or no added sugars; athletes who need
hydration beverages with added sugars are the exception to this
543
recommendation (3). Saturated fat is fat that is often found solid at
room temperature. Examples of these include milk fat, butter, or the
fat inside or around meat. Ideally, saturated fat should be limited in
the diet and the focus should be on unsatur ated fats such as liquid
oils used in cooking. In a gener al, nonactiv e populatio n, sodium
should also be minimiz ed in the diet to no more than 2,300
milligrams per day, but health recommendations for lower salt intake
may not be appropriate for endurance athletes and those who sweat
a lot. Alcohol has calories but few nutrients; adults of legal drinking
age who choose to drink should do so in moder ation.
MyPlate should  be consider ed a starting point that athletes can
use to evaluate their diet. In gener al, if a diet provides a variety of
foods from each group, it is more likely to contain an adequate
amount of each macronutrient, vitamin, and miner al. However, if the
diet excludes an entire food group, specific nutrients may be lacking.
For example, an athlete who excludes dairy from the diet may have
a tough time meeting his or her nutrition requirements for calcium
and vitamin D (in fortified milk and fortified yogurts). Fortified soy
alternativ es are viewed by the USDA as the only plant-based milk
alternativ e equiv alent to milk, whereas other nondairy milk
alternativ es do not have the same nutritional value as milk and must
be chosen carefully to avoid deficiencies in calcium and vitamin D
(45). Added sugars are also a concern in plant-based milk
alternativ es. Individuals who exclude all animal foods and fish might
not meet their vitamin B12 needs. B12 is found in meat, poultry, fish,
eggs, and dairy foods, though some breakfast cereals, nondairy milk
alternativ es, meat substi tutes, and nutritional yeast are fortified with
B12. Thus, it is highly recommended that individuals who exclude
food groups work with their sports dietitian to find suitable
replacements or replacement combinations to ensur e that they meet
their nutrient r equirements f or heal th and perf ormance.
Foods within each food group share similar nutrient composi tions
and are consider ed interchangeable; howev er, a variety of foods
should be consumed within each group. For example, eating an
544
orange, an apple, and a pear provides a broader array of essential
nutrients than is provided by three apples. A diet providing a variety
of foods from each group is more likely to meet a person’ s
macronutrient  (carbohydrate, protein, and fat) as well as
micronutrient  (vitamins and miner als) needs.
The resour ces section of the MyPlate websi te offers several tools
to help plan a healthy diet. MyPlate Plan gives food group targets of
what and how much to eat within a person’ s calorie allowance based
on age, sex, height, weight, and physical activity level. It also comes
as an app, MyPlate App, to help build healthy habits, pick daily food
goals, and set real-time progress. Further , there is the Shop Simple
with MyPlate Tool that can be used to find cost-saving food-
purchasing methods and new w ays to pr epare budget -friendly f oods.
Dietary Reference Intakes
Because athletes eat food, not individual nutrients, dietary
recommendations should be presented in terms of specific food
choices. Howev er, it is also important to have an understanding of
the athlete’ s nutrient requirements in order to make food
recommendations. The Dietary Refe rence Intakes (DRIs) ,
developed by the U.S. Department of Agricul ture (USDA) and of
Health and Human Services (HHS), are a complete set of nutrient
intakes for use when evaluating and planning diets for healthy
individuals. The DRIs are listed for the macronutrients as well as
micronutrients, electr olytes, and water (71-75, 109, 118, 164). The
DRIs are based on the body of literature regarding nutrient intake
and the reduction of chronic disease, as opposed to simply
prevention of dietary deficiencies (115). Because nutrient intake can
vary consider ably from day to day, the DRIs apply to a person’ s
usual intake. Therefore, when a sports dietitian assesses a person’ s
nutrient intake, they look at several days in order to get an average
daily intake for each nutrient. This is especial ly true with regard to
evaluating intake of nutrient s found in few foods or in very small
amounts in foods (115). Fewer days’ worth of food records are
545
needed to get a good estimation of average protein intake, since this
does not vary much from day to day (115). The DRIs include the
following:
Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA)— The average daily
nutrient requirement adequate for meeting the needs of nearly all
(97%-98%) healthy people within each life stage and sex; often
used to plan nutri tional ly adequate diets f or people.
Adequate Intake (AI)— The average daily nutrient intake level
recommended when a RDA cannot be establ ished.
Tolerable Upper Intake Level (UL)— The maximum average
daily nutrient level not associated with any adverse health effects.
Intakes above the UL increase potential risk of adverse effects.
(The UL represents intake from all sources including food, water,
and supplements. )
Estimated Average Requirement (EAR)— The average daily
nutrient intake level consider ed sufficient to meet the needs of
half of the heal thy population wi thin each l ife stage and sex.
The Dietary Guidel ines for Americans 2020-2025 has identified
several dietary nutrients that are under -consumed by the public
(males and females in all age groups); these nutrients are identi fied
as the Nutrients of Public Health Concern and include dietary fiber,
vitamin D, calcium, and potassium (56). Dietary patterns that do not
meet the recommended intakes of fruits, vegetables, and whole
grains are often lacking in adequate dietary fiber and potassium.
More than 90 percent of women and 97 percent of men do not meet
recommended intakes for dietary fiber. Potassium-rich foods include
vegetables, fruits, dairy, and protein foods, particularly white baked
potatoes, acorn squash, cooked spinach, cooked plantain s, kiwifruit,
100% orange juice, banana s, and plain nonfat or low-fat yogurt.
Dairy foods, fortified beverages (e.g., soy beverages and orange
juice), and canned sardines and salmon are excellent sources of
calcium, while fatty fish, fortified beverages (e.g., milk, orange juice,
soy beverages), and fortified yogurt are excellent sources of vitamin
546
D. Also, iron is a concern for specific populations, particul arly female
athletes (149). Iron-deficient anemia and iron deficiency are five to
seven times more common in female athletes than male athletes.
Shellfish (e.g., oysters and mussels), iron-fortified cereals, dark leafy
greens (e.g., spinach), and soybeans are excellent sources of iron,
providing 20% or more of the daily value for iron per serving; red
meat and poul try ar e consider ed good sour ces (41a).
For More Information on Nutrition
Strength and condi tioning professionals  can rely on the following websi tes for more
information about nutri tion:
DRI Calculator for Healthcare Professionals (based on the DRIs, this dietary
planning tool calculates dai ly nutrient r ecommendations):
www .nal.usda .gov/human -nutrition -and -food -safety /dri-calculator
National I nstitutes of Heal th—Of fice of Dietary Supplements:
https:// ods.od.nih.gov
The Dietary Supplement Label Database (DSLD) from the Office of Dietary
Supplements (ODS) at the National Institutes of Health (NIH) captur es all
information printed on labels of dietary supplement products sold in the United
States and can be used by consumers to learn more about ingredients listed
within the Supplement F acts label b y clicking on ingr edient names:
https:// dsld.od.nih.gov
The Healthy Living and Weight section  of the USDA Nutrition.go v websi te gives
information and support for establ ishing and maintaining a positive body image
through healthy eating habits, strategies for success to help someone to lose or
gain weight safely and effectively, weight management for children and teens,
and information on how to evaluate claims made by weight -loss products and
diets:
www .nutrition .gov/topics /healthy -living -and -weight
Peer-reviewed journal articles:
www .pubmed .gov
Collegiate and Pr ofessional Sports Dieti tians Association:
www .sportsrd .org
International S ociety of Sports Nutri tion:
www .sportsnutritionsociety .org
Sports and Human P erformance Nutri tion (SHPN):
547
https:// www .shpndpg .org/home
548
Macronutrients
A macronutrien t is a nutrient that is required in significant amounts
in the diet. Three important classes of macronutrients are protein,
carboh ydrate, and f at.
Protein
Protein  is the primary  structur al and functional component of every
cell in the human body (164). Dietary proteins are used for growth
and development and to build and repair cells; they also serve as
enzymes, transport carriers, and hormones. Therefore, dietary
protein intake is essential for maintaining health, reproduction, and
cellular structur e and f unction (164).
Proteins are composed of carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, and
nitrogen. Amino  means “nitrogen containing, ” and amino acids  are
the molecules that, when joined in groups of a few dozen to
hundr eds, form the thousands of proteins occurring in nature.
Proteins in the human body are composed of various combinations
of the 20 individual amino acids. Nine amino acids are “essential”
because the body cannot manuf acture them—they must be obtained
through the diet. Four amino acids can be synthesiz ed by the human
body and are therefore consider ed “nonessential” because they do
not need to be consumed in the diet. Finally, seven amino acids are
consider ed condi tional ly essential. These amino acids are typical ly
not essential but become essential, and therefore must be obtained
through the diet, during times of illness and stress. The amino acids
are listed in table 10. 7.
TABLE 10.7  Essential, Nonessential, and
Conditionally Essential Amino Acids
Essential Nonessential Conditionally essential
Histidine Alanine Arginine
Based on Institute of Medicine Standing Commi ttee on the Scientific Evaluation of Dietary
Reference I ntakes, Food and Nutri tion B oard (2005), 593.
549
Essential Nonessential Conditionally essential
Isoleucine
Leucine
Lysine
Methionine
Phenylalanine
Threonine
Tryptophan
ValineAspar agine
Aspartic acid (aspartate)
Glutamic acid (glutamate)Cysteine (cystine)
Glutamine
Glycine
Proline
Serine
Tyrosine
Based on Institute of Medicine Standing Commi ttee on the Scientific Evaluation of Dietary
Reference I ntakes, Food and Nutri tion B oard (2005), 593.
Amino acids are joined together by peptide bonds. Two amino
acids together are referred to as a dipeptide , and several amino
acids together are referred to as a polypeptide . Polypeptide chains
bond together to form a multitude of proteins with various structur es
and functions.  Almost half of the body’s protein reserv e exists as
skeletal muscl e, while approximately 15% makes up structur al
tissues including skin and blood. The rest of the body’s protein
reserv es are in viscer al tissues such as the liver and kidney and in
the bones (47).
Protein Quality and Dietary Recommendations
Protein quality is determined by amino acid content and protein
digestibility , as calculated by how much of the protein’ s nitrogen is
absorbed during digestion and its ability to provide the amino acids
necessary for growth, maintenance, and repair. Higher-quality
proteins are highly digestible  and contain all of the essential amino
acids. Animal-based proteins—including eggs, dairy foods, meat,
fish, and poultry—contain all of the essential amino acids, while soy,
quinoa, and buckwheat are the only plant-based proteins that
contain all nine essential amino acids. In gener al, plant proteins are
less digestible than anima l proteins, though digest ibility can
sometimes be improved through processing and preparation (110,
164). Although measur es of protein quality, such as the protein
digestibility correct amino  acid score (PDCAAS) , take protein
550
digestibi lity (or bioavailability ) into account as well as a protein’ s
ability to provide the essential amino acids necessary for the
synthesis of body proteins and other metabol ites, they do not take
into account how other compounds within the food alter the
bioavailability of the protein’s amino acids. Foods contain
antinutri tional factors—compounds that reduce the digestion and
absorption of a nutrient, making it less available for use by the body
(92). Several antinutri tional factors lead to digestiv e losses and
structur al changes of amino acids that limit amino acid bioavailability
(110). For instance, during cooking, some foods will brown; this
browning, called a Maillard reactio n, leads to compounds that can
decrease the bioavailability of certain amino acids. Although the
majori ty of plant-based foods fall short in one or more essential
amino acids, all people, not just vegetarians and vegans  (those who
consume only plants and plant products—no meat, fish, poultry,
eggs, milk, or other foods that come from animals), can meet their
protein needs by consuming a variety of plant foods including
legumes, vegetables, seeds, nuts, rice, and whole grains that
provide different amino acids so that all essential amino acids are
consumed over the course of the day (152). Novel plant-based meat
alternativ es are also an emerging option to meet dietary protein
needs, particu larly given that our world population is growing and
living longer , and animal proteins alone cannot sustain all of our
protein needs.
While dietary  recommend ations are stated as protein
requirements, the actual requirement is for amino acids.  The need
for amino acids in sedentary , healthy adults results from the
constant turno ver of cells and cellular proteins. During cell turno ver
—the constant breakdown and regener ation of cells—the body’s free
amino acid pool is the immed iate and largest supplier of amino acids
(105). The pool is replenished from dietary protein digestion, as well
as the amino acids released from tissue turno ver. Substantial ly more
protein is turned over daily than is ordinari ly consumed, indicating
that amino acids are recycled (119). This process is not completely
551
efficient, howe ver, so dietary amino acid intake is required to replace
losses.
The RDA for protein for men and women 19 years of age and
older, based on nitrogen balance studies, is 0.8 grams of high-qual ity
protein per kilogram body weight per day (164). Children, teens, and
pregnant and lactating women have higher dietary protein needs as
reflected in the RDA for these groups. Howev er, protein needs are
inversely proportional to calorie intake because small amounts of
protein can be metabol ized as a source of energy when a person is
in a state of negativ e calorie balance, when fewer calories are
consumed than are expended (e.g., typical ly only 1%-6% of total
caloric expendi ture in most circumstances but up to 10% during
prolonged exercise in a glycogen-depleted state) (98, 164). In this
case, the protein cannot be used for the intended purpose of
replacing the amino acid pool. When caloric intake goes down,
protein requirement goes up (101). Therefore, the Institute of
Medicine (IOM) establ ished an Acceptable Macronutrient
Distribution Range (AMDR)  for protein, which covers a wide
range of protein intake. The AMDR is 5% to 20% of total calories for
children ages 1 to 3 years, 10% to 30% of total calories for children
ages 4 to 18 years, and 10% to 35% of total calories for adults older
than age 18 years (164). Adult men and women typical ly consume
an average of 16% of their calories from protein (68). The AMDR for
a nutrient includes a range of intakes associated with reduced risk of
chronic disease while still providing adequate intakes of other
essential nutrients (118). Though the DRI for protein fits within the
AMDR, the DRI is based solely on body weight and therefore does
not take low or high calori e intakes into account. Based on the
AMDR, when calorie intake is lower, protein needs to go up as a
percentage of total calorie intake by approximately 1% for every
100-calorie decrease below 2,000 calories. When total calorie intake
is higher, protein needs, expressed as a percentage of total caloric
intake, go down to a certain point. In practice, sports dietitians
552
should first establ ish an athlete’ s protein intake and then add
carboh ydrate and f ats as determined b y total calorie needs (95).
Concerns About the RDA for Protein
Contr oversy surrounds the RDA for protein since some scientists
suggest that adults should consume more than the RDA for bone
health (59), weight management, and building and repairing muscle
(122, 123). In addition, resear ch suggests that higher-protein,
lower -carboh ydrate diets can favorably affect blood lipids,
particularly in obese individua ls, and therefore also decrease some of
the risk factors for cardiovascular disease and metabol ic syndr ome
(94).
Protein is a building block for strong bones, contributing to 50%
of bone volume and 33% of bone mass (96). Protein’ s effect on
bone may be due, in part, to its influence on insulin-like growth
factor-1 (IGF-1), which is produced in the liver and promotes bone
and muscle formation (144). Though resear ch suggests that
supplemental, but not dietary , protein increases calcium losses
through urine, in healthy individuals consuming 0.7 to 2.1 grams of
protein per kilogram body weight, both urinary calcium excretion and
intestinal calcium absorption increase (88). In fact, low dietary
protein intake (0.7 g protein per kg body weight per day) suppr esses
intestinal calciu m absorption  (87). The effects of protein on bone
health have been the center of some controversy, but experimental
studies gener ally indicate that dietary protein supports bone health
when consume d as part of a high-qual ity whole-f ood diet containing
adequate calciu m. Howev er, future high-qual ity experimental studies
are necessary to fully understand the interactive effects of dietary
protein and diet qual ity on bone heal th (37).
Protein also plays a multifaceted role in weight management.
First, it promotes satiet y in a dose-dependent manner: Greater
amounts of protein lead to a greater increase in satiet y (48).
Howev er, the satiating effect of protein also depends on the timing
of protein intake, form (solid vs. liquid), concurr ent intake of other
553
macronutrients, and time until the next meal (4). The type of protein
may also have an effect on satiet y, though resear ch has not fully
elucidated which proteins may have the greatest impact (16, 101).
Protein also has the greatest thermic effect of feeding—mor e
calories are burned during the digestion of protein as compar ed to
carboh ydrate or fat. Finally, higher protein diets help spare muscle
loss whi le a person is on a r educed-calorie diet (93, 132).
The amino acids in protein are used for growth (including muscle
growth) and for repairing  tissue, synthesizing enzymes and
hormones, and repairing and making new cells. Though adults in a
gener al fitness program can likely meet their protein requirements
by consuming 0.8 to 1.0 gram of protein per kilogram body weight
per day, athletes and those  who exercise intensely require more
protein (76). Traditional ly, aerobic endur ance athletes have placed
less of a priority on protein in comparison to carboh ydrate; howev er,
adequate protein intake and timing are crucial for optimal
performance. Protein recommendations for aerobic endur ance
athletes are 1.2 to 2.0 grams of protein per kilogram body weight
per day (167). For building muscle mass and for maintaining muscle
mass through a positive muscle protein balance, an overall daily
protein intake in the range of 1.4 to 2.0 grams of protein per
kilogram body weight per day is ideal (76). Athletes who are on a
reduced-calorie diet may need more protein per day to preserv e
muscle tissue during weight loss (76).
In addition to eating the right amount of protein per day, resear ch
supports the idea of athletes consuming sufficient protein as soon as
possible after exercise, when muscle tissue is most receptiv e to
amino acids in order to maximize muscle growth (76). In fact, after
exercise, both muscle protein synthesis  and breakdo wn are
increased, though net protein balance is negativ e when the exercise
is done in a fasted state (127). Protein consumed after exercise
increases muscle protein synthesis, and muscles remain sensitive to
protein ingestion for at least 24 hours following a resistance training
bout (114). Reviews surrounding postex ercise protein ingestion have
554
suggested that when recommended levels of protein are consumed,
the effect of protein timing appears to be, at best, minimal; total
daily protein intake is the most important factor in promoting
exercise-induced muscle growth (5, 140). While nutrient timing of
protein potenti ally can be a beneficial strategy for enhancing muscle
protein synthesis, the effects on muscle hypertr ophy ultimately
depend on the timing of the prework out protein meal; the closer the
meal is to the training session, the less need for immediate
postwork out protein intake (140). To maximiz e muscle growth,
consume high-qual ity protein (at a dose of approximately  0.4 to 0.5
g of protein per kg of lean body mass) both before and after
exercise within about 4 to 6 hours of each other, depending on meal
size (140). Athletes with high body masses may struggle to consume
enough protein to meet required daily needs. Therefore, it is
recommended that these athletes consume high-qual ity protein
immediately to 2 hours after exercise (86). Ingesting 20 to 40 grams
of high-qual ity protein every 3 to 4 hours throughout the day
appears to most favorably affect muscle protein synthe sis and is
associated with improved body composi tion and performance
outcomes, particularly in strength athletes (86). Aerobic endur ance
athletes may benefi t from the addition of high-qual ity protein during
endur ance exercise in addition to their regular carboh ydrate intake
to suppr ess muscle damage and impr ove feelings of sor eness (76).
Concerns surrounding protein intakes above the RDA are
unfounded for the most part in healthy individuals (105). Proteins
consumed in excess of the amount needed for the synthesis of
tissue are broken down (103), the nitrogen is excreted as urea in
urine, and the remaining ketoacids are either used directly as
sources of energy or converted to carboh ydrate (gluconeogenesis )
or body fat (64). In fact, a study examining high protein intake in
athletes found that protein intakes up to 2.8 grams per kilogram
body weight (as assessed by a seven-da y diet record) did not impair
any measures of renal function (130). The strength and conditioning
professional should be aware that consistently high protein intakes,
555