# Section 10.5

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 10: Basic Nutritional Factors Affecting Health

**Section:** 10.5 -- Minerals

**PDF Pages:** 591--612

with sickle cell trait, cystic fibrosis, and some other diseas es have an
increased risk of becoming dehydrated (12, 163). Even mild
dehydration, representing 2% to 3% weight loss, can increase core
body temperature and significantly affect athletic performance by
increasing fatigue and decreasing motiv ation, neuromuscular control,
accuracy, power , strength, muscular endur ance, and overall
performance (13, 26, 42, 58, 84, 85, 141, 153). Dehydration can
increase core body temper ature, reduce stroke volume and cardiac
output, decrease blood pressure, reduce blood flow to muscles,
increase heartbeat, exacerbate symptomatic exertional
rhabdom yolysis, and increase risk of heatstr oke and death (3, 32,
108). One’s risk for dehydration, and subsequent heat stress, is
greater in hot, humid en vironments and at al titude (27 , 108, 146).
Fluid Balance
Fluid balance  is the balanc e between water intake from food,
drinks, and metabol ic water and water output through expired air,
insensible perspiration, sweat, feces, and urine. It is important for a
person to consume adequate sources of water to prevent
dehydration from excess water loss. The AI for water is 3.7 liters
(125.1 fl oz or 15.6 cups) and 2.7 L (91.3 fl oz or 11.4 cups) per day,
respectiv ely, for men and women. Howev er, the AI for pregnant and
lactating wome n is 3 liters (101.4 fl oz or 12.7 cups) and 3.8 liters
(128.5 fl oz or 16.1 cups) per day, respectiv ely. All sources of fluid,
including beverages such as coffee, tea, juice, and soda, as well as
the fluid in foods, contribute to meeting a person’ s water needs from
dietary sour ces (75).
Maintaining fluid balance during training and competi tion can be a
challenge for many athletes, particularly those who sweat profusely
or train in hot, humid environments or at altitude. In addition to
environmental condi tions, clothing, equipment, and larger body size
can increase sweat rate, while unsaf e weight loss practices such as
frequent use or overuse of diuretics or laxativ es can increase risk of
dehydration (32, 38). America n footbal l players, particular ly linemen,
591
have a greater risk of becoming dehydrated becaus e of their
equipment and, in many cases, larger body size (32). For example, a
study in National Footbal l League players found that backs and
receivers, with an average body mass of 93 ± 6 kilograms (205.0 ±
13.2 lb), lost an average of 1.4 ± 0.45 liters (47.3 ± 15.2 fl oz; or
approximately 6 ± 2 cups) of sweat per hour, while lineme n, with an
average body mass of 135.6  ± 17 kilograms (298.9 ± 37.5 lb), lost
an average 2.25 ± 0.68 liters (76.1 ± 23.0 fl oz; approximately 9.5
± 2.9 cups) of sweat per hour during practice. Calculated sweat
losses for both groups during a total of 4.5 hours of practice on days
with two practice sessions were 6.4 ± 2.0 liters (216.4 ± 67.6 fl oz;
approximately 27.1 ± 8.5 cups) for backs and receivers and 10.1 ±
3.1 liters (341.5 ± 104.8 fl oz; 42.7 ± 13.1 cups) for linemen (55).
Multiple layers of clothing and protectiv e equipment contribute to
sweat losses and dehydration risk in hockey players (14), while
intentional dehydration and other unsaf e weight loss practices can
increase dehydration risk in wrestlers (170). In addition, it is
important to note that a very wide range of fluid losses through
sweat exists. For instance, National Basketball Association players
lost from 1.0 to 4.6 liters (33.8-155.5 fl oz; 4.2-19.4 cups) and had a
mean loss of 2.2 ± 0.8 liters (74.4 ± 27.1 fl oz; 9.3 ± 3.4 cups) of
sweat over the course of a 40-minute game in which the average
playing time was 21 ± 8 minutes (120). To reduce the risk of
dehydration and heat stress, athletes should avoid exercising under
extremely hot, humid condi tions and should adequately replace fluid
losses f rom pr olonged ex ertion.
Preventing Dehydration
Given the negativ e effects associated with dehydration, athletes
should try to prevent water weight losses exceeding 2% of body
weight while also restoring electr olytes lost through sweat (3, 139).
The first step to preventing dehydration is to assess hydration status
(table 10.15 ). Urine specific gravity (USG) can be used to assess
hydration status because the test is easy to use, inexpe nsive, and
592
portable (168). Howev er, USG is not a sensitive indicator of acute
changes in hydration; instead it is better as a measur e of chronic
hydration status (120, 131). A quick and simple method for
estimating hydration status involves measuring change s in body
weight from before to after a workout. Athletes should weigh
themselv es in minimal, lightweight clothing, after drying off and
urinating, immediately before and after their workout. Sweaty
clothes should  be removed before weighing. Each pound  (0.45 kg)
lost during practice represents 16 ounces (0.47 L) of fluid. A loss of
2% or more of body weight indicates the athlete is not adequately
replacing fluid lost through sweat (3). In addition to identi fying acute
dehydration from one workout, assessing weight changes over time
may help identi fy athletes who are chronical ly dehydrated—those
who lose several pounds over the course of a few days (24). See
table 10.15  for biomark ers of pr oper or suf ficient h ydration.
TABLE 10.15  Biomarkers of Hydration Status
Measure PracticalityValidity (acute vs. chronic
changes) EUH cutoff
Total body w ater Low Acute and chr onic <2%
Plasma osmolal ity Medium Acute and chr onic <290 mOsm
Urine speci fic gravityHigh Chronic <1.020 g/mL
Urine osmolal ity High Chronic <700 mOsm
Body weight High Acute and chr onic* <1%
Note:  EUH = euh ydration.
*Potential ly confounded by changes in body composi tion during very prolonged
assessment periods.
Reprinted by permission from American College of Sports Medicine, M.N. Sawka, L.M.
Burke, et al., “American College of Sports Medicine Position Stand: Exercise and Fluid
Replacement, ” Medicine & S cience in Sports & Ex ercise 39, no . 2 (2007): 377-390.
In addition to identifying athletes who do not adequately hydrate,
one can calculate sweat rate, thereby giving a better idea of fluid
needs during exercise, by weighing athletes before exercise and
593
again after an intense 1-hou r practice session while also measuring
fluid intake and urine volume produced. Sweat rate is equal to
preexercise body weight minus postex ercise body weight + fluid
intake during exercise − urine produced (14, 24). Assessments of
urine quanti ty, through USG or urine volume, may be misleading
during the immediate rehydration period after dehydration. When
athletes consume large quanti ties of hypotonic fluid, they produce
copious amounts of urine long before they become adequately
hydrated (147 , 148).
In addition to monitoring weight changes, athletes are sometimes
advised to check their urine color. Howev er, the relationship between
urine color and hydration status is very subjectiv e (3, 108). Also,
beets, blackberries, certain food colors, and medications can turn
urine pink, red, or light brown (9). In addition, B vitamins,
carotenoids (such as beta carotene), and some medications can turn
urine dark yellow, bright yellow, or orange, while artificial food colors
(such as those  found in some  sport drinks) may also turn urine blue
or green (9).
A very wide range of fluid losses, in the form of sweat,
exists among  athletes. Therefore each athlete should
develop an individualized hydration plan.
Electrolytes
The major electr olytes lost in sweat include sodium chloride and, to
a lesser extent and in order, potassium, magnesium, and calcium
(89). Sodium influences fluid regulation by helping retain more of
the fluid consumed (107). In addition, all of the electr olytes lost
through sweat are essential to muscle contraction and nerve
conduction. Thus, any disturbance in the balance of electrolytes in
body fluids could potential ly interfere with performance. Sodium
losses through sweat vary tremendously between athletes, with
reported conce ntrations ranging from 0.2 to greater than 12.5 g/L
(10 to over 544 mEq/L) (3, 32). Given the large quanti ty of sodium
594
some athletes lose through sweat, replacing sodium losses may
require a conscious decision to choose higher -sodium foods, salt
their food, and add electr olytes to their sport drinks. Athletes who
exercise intens ely or for hours and hydrate excessiv ely with only
water or a no- or low-sodium beverage may dilute their blood
sodium levels to danger ously low levels—below 130 mmol/L —a
condi tion called hyponatremia . This leads to intracellular swelling,
and, when blood sodium levels fall below 125 mmol/L, to headaches,
nausea, vomiting, muscle cramps, swollen hands and feet,
restlessness, and disorientation. When blood sodium drops below
120 mmol/L, risk of developing cerebral edema, seizur es, coma,
brain stem herniation, respiratory arrest, and risk of death increase
(2, 3, 6). To avoid hyponatr emia, fluid intake should not exceed
sweat losses (athletes should not weigh more after they finish
exercising than they did at the start of their training session), and
athletes should consume sodium through either sport drinks or food
(3, 120).
Sport drinks provide small amounts of potassium to replace sweat
potassium losses. Howev er, they are not a significant contributor to
total potassium intake. Because resear ch shows that less than 2% of
adults in the United States meet the dietary recommen dations for
potassium (31), athletes should focus on consuming more
potassium-rich foods in their diet, such as tomatoes, citrus fruits,
melons, potatoes, bananas, and mi lk.
Athletes who exercise intensely or for hours and hydrate
excessively with only water or a no- or low-sodium
beverage may dilute their blood sodium to dangerously
low levels.
Fluid Intake G uidelines
Ideally, athletes should start exercise or training in a hydrated state,
avoid losing more than 2% of body weight (due to sweat losses)
during exercise, and rehydrate completely after exercise and before
595
the next training session. The amount of fluid necessary to fully
achiev e rehydration depends on the time period before the next bout
of training. However, studies  show that some athletes start practice
or competition in a hypohydrated state, making it more difficult to
consume enough fluid during the exercise session to make up for
poor preexercise hydration status (120, 134). Additional ly, athletes
with significant sweat losses may not voluntari ly drink enough fluid
to adequately rehydrate and prevent dehydration during training and
competi tion. A systematic approach to fluid replacement is necessary
for this reason and also because thirst may not be a reliable
indicator of fluid needs for athletes who are heavy sweaters or those
who are practicing intensely in hot environmental condi tions (24).
Though fluid and electr olyte guidel ines should be individual ized as
much as possible, given the wide range of fluid and electr olyte
losses in athletes, the gener al guidel ines presented next are a good
starting place with athletes until specific recommendations can be
provided based on sweat rate (6). Additional ly, strength and
condi tioning professionals should ensur e that athletes are given
adequate time to drink and access to cool fluids (10-15  °C [50-59
°F]) (82).
Before Activity
Prehydrate, if necessary , several hours before exercise to allow for
fluid absorption and urine output (3).
During Activity
Due to large variations in sweat rates and electr olyte concentrations,
athletes should measur e weight changes during training and
competi tion in specific weath er condi tions and develop individual ized
hydration strategies based on this information (3). During prolonged
activity in hot weather , the IOM recommends sport drinks containing
20 to 30 mEq of sodium (460-690 mg with chloride as the anion) per
liter, 2 to 5 mEq of potassium (78-195 mg) per liter, and
carboh ydrate in a concentr ation of 5% to 10% (70). Additional ly,
596
when a sport drink is ingested at high rates during intense or
prolonged exercise, athletes may want to choose one that contains
multiple types of carboh ydrates with different intestina l transport
mechanisms, such as glucose, fructose, and maltodextrin . Ingestion
of multiple types of carboh ydrate versus a single carboh ydrate will
lead to greater gastric emptying, carboh ydrate absorption, oxidation,
and possibly better performance (36, 83). All beverages provided
should be cool—10-15 °C (50-59 °F)—but not cold (24).
The American Academ y of Pediatrics recommends periodic
drinking be enforced in children. These guidel ines suggest that
children weigh ing 88 pounds (40 kg) drink 5 ounces (148 mL) of
cold water or a flavored salted beverage every 20 minutes during
practice and that adolescents weighing 132 pounds (60 kg) drink 9
ounces (266 mL) even if they do not feel thirsty. Another
recommendation is a sodium chloride concentr ation of 15 to 20
mmol/L (1 g per 2 pints), which has been shown to increase
voluntary hydration by 90% when compar ed to unflavored water
(34, 171).
After Activity
After exercise, athletes should replace fluid and electr olyte losses. If
time permi ts, normal meals, snacks (provided that they contain
some sodium), and water will restore fluid and electr olyte losses.
Additional salt can be added to foods when sweat sodium  losses are
substantial (3, 75). If dehydration is significant, or the athlete has a
short recovery period before the next bout of exercise (<12 h), a
more aggressive approach is warranted: Athletes should  consume
approximately 1.5 L (51 ounces) of fluid (with sufficient electr olytes)
for each kilogram of body weight loss (0.7 L or 24 oz or 3 cups for
each pound of body weight). This amount of fluid helps account for
increased urine production stemming from the consumption of a
large volume of fluid (3, 147).
597
Fluid Intake G uidelines at a Glance
Before Training
Athletes should have a USG reading  <1.02. They should prehydrate, if
necessary , several hours before exercise to allow for fluid absorption and
urine output (3).
During a Training Session
Children and Adolescents
Children weighing 88 pounds (40 kg) should drink 5 ounces (148 mL) of cold
water or a fla vored, sal ted bev erage ev ery 20 minutes during tr aining (34).
Adolescents weighin g 132 pounds (60 kg) should drink 9 ounces (266 mL) of
cold w ater or a fla vored, sal ted bev erage ev ery 20 minutes (171).
Adults
Athletes should follow an individual ized hydration plan. During prolonged
activity in hot weather , they should consume a sport drink containing 20 to
30 mEq of sodium (460-690 mg with chloride as the anion) per liter, 2 to 5
mEq of potassium (78-195 mg) per liter, and carboh ydrate in a concentr ation
of 5% to 10%.
After Training
Athletes should consume adequate food and fluids, as well as sodium, to
restore hydration. If dehydration is significant or the athlete has <12 hours
before the next exercise bout, a more aggressive approach is warranted and
the athlete should consume approximately 1.5 liters (51 oz) of fluid (with
sufficient electr olytes) for each kilogram of body weight lost (0.7 L or 24 oz
or 3 cups f or each pound of body weight).
598
Conclusion
Nutrition plays an important role in strength and condi tioning.
Adequate hydration and electr olytes; appropriate energy intake; and
adequate protein, carboh ydrate, fat, vitamin, and miner al intakes
allow athletes to reap maximal benefi ts from training. A gener al
understanding of nutrition principles and applications is essential for
strength and condi tioning professionals so that they can help
athletes sort through nutrition misinf ormation and provide sound
guidel ines that athletes can use to impr ove their diets.
KEY TERMS
Acceptable Macr onutrient Distribution R ange (AMDR)
Adequate I ntake (AI)
amino acids
anemia
bioavailability
carboh ydrate
cholester ol
dehydration
Dietary R eference I ntakes (DRI s)
disaccharides
docosahexaenoic acid (DHA)
eicosapentaenoic acid (EP A)
electr olytes
Estimated A verage R equirement (EAR)
fat
fatty acids
fiber
fluid balance
fructose
galactose
gluconeogenesis
599
glucose
glycemic index (GI)
glycemic load
glycogen
glycogenesis
high-densi ty lipoprotein (HDL)
hydration
hypohydration
hyponatr emia
lactose
low-densi ty lipoprotein (LDL)
macronutrient
maltose
micronutrient
miner als
monosac charides
monounsatur ated
muscle pr otein synthesis
MyPlate
nutrient densi ty
omega-3 f atty acid alpha-l inolenic acid (AL A)
polypeptide
polysac charides
polyunsatur ated
protein
protein digestibi lity
protein digestibi lity corr ect amino acid scor e (PDCAA S)
Recommended Dietary Al lowances (RDA)
saturated
sports dieti tian
sucrose
Tolerable Upper I ntake Lev el (UL)
triglycerides
vegan
600
very low -densi ty lipoproteins (VLDL)
vitamins
STUDY QUESTIONS
  1.  Which of the following is the player development staff member
who has the most accurate nutrition knowledge and is best to
counsel athletes wi th complex nutri tional needs?
  a.  athletic tr ainer
  b.  strength and condi tioning pr ofessional
  c.  sports dieti tian
  d.  ph ysical ther apist
  2.  Which of the following food groups are illustrated in the
MyPlate icon?
  a.  oi ls, proteins, w ater, fiber , vitamins, and miner als
  b.  protein f oods, f ruits, vegetables, gr ains, and dairy
  c.  pr oteins, carboh ydrates, f ats, and w ater
  d.  macr onutrients, micr onutrients, w ater
  3.  Which of the following is the recommended intake of protein
for athletes?
  a.  0. 7 to 0.8 gr ams pr otein per ki logram body weight per da y
  b.  0.8 to 1.0 gr ams pr otein per ki logram body weight per da y
  c.  1.2 to 1.4 gr ams pr otein per ki logram body weight per da y
  d.  1.2 to 2.0 gr ams pr otein per ki logram body weight per da y
  4.  For optimal health, which of the following is the recommended
amount of added sugars in the diet?
  a.  less than 5% of total calories
  b.  less than 10% of total calories
  c.  mor e than 15% of total calories
  d.  mor e than 20% of total calories
  6.  Which of the following actions should athletes take to assess
fluid losses after ex ercise?
  a.  check urine color
  b.  check their body temper ature
601
  c.  weigh themselv es bef ore and after ex ercise
  d.  measur e how much w ater they dr ank during ex ercise
TABLE 10.1  Food Group Recommendations From
MyPlate
Population
and age
rangeEstimated
daily
calories
for those
who are
not
physically
fitaFruitbVegetablescGrainsdProtein
foodseDairy and
fortified soy
alternativesf
Children2-3 1,000 1-1.5
cups1 to 1.5 cups 3-5 oz
equiv alents
(1.5-2.5
cups)24 oz
equiv alents2-2.5 cups
4-8 1,200-
1,4001-2
cups1.5-2.5 cups 4-6 oz
equiv alents
(2-3 cups)3-5.5 oz
equiv alents2.5 cups
Girls 9-
131,600 1.5-2
cups1.5-3 cups 5-7 oz
equiv alents
(2.5-3.5
cups)4-6 oz
equiv alents3 cups
14-
181,800 1.5-2
cups2.5-3 cups 6-8 oz
equiv alents
(3-4 cups)5-6.5 oz
equiv alents3 cups
Boys 9-
131,800 1.5-2
cups2-3.5 cups 5-9 oz
equiv alents
(2.5-4 .5
cups)5-6.5 oz
equiv alents3 cups
14-
182,200 2-2.5
cups2.5-4 cups 6-10 oz
equiv alents
(3-5 cups)5.5-7 oz
equiv alents3 cups
Females 19-
302,000 1.5-2
cups2.5-3 cups 6-8 oz
equiv alents
(3-4 cups)5-6.5 oz
equiv alents3 cups
602
Population
and age
rangeEstimated
daily
calories
for those
who are
not
physically
fitaFruitbVegetablescGrainsdProtein
foodseDairy and
fortified soy
alternativesf
31-
591,800 1.5-2
cups2-3 cups 5-7 oz
equiv alents
(2.5-3.5
cups)5-6 oz
equiv alents3 cups
60+ 1,600 1.5-2
cups2-3 cups 5-7 oz
equiv alents
(2.5-3.5
cups)5-6 oz
equiv alents3 cups
Males 19-
302,400 2-2.5
cups3-4 cups 8-10 oz
equiv alents
(4 to 5
cups)6.5-7 oz
equiv alents3 cups
31-
592,200 2-2.5
cups3-4 cups 7-10 oz
equiv alents
(3.5-5
cups)6-7 oz
equiv alents3 cups
60+ 2,000 2
cups2.5-3.5 cups 6-9 oz
equiv alents
(3-4.5
cups)5.5-6.5 oz
equiv alents3 cups
603
Population
and age
rangeEstimated
daily
calories
for those
who are
not
physically
fitaFruitbVegetablescGrainsdProtein
foodseDairy and
fortified soy
alternativesf
The amount needed from each group depends on age, sex, height, weight, and level of
physical activity. The amount can also depend on whether the individual is pregnant or
breastfeeding. Gener al recommendations b y age ar e shown in the chart.
aThese amounts are appropriate for individuals who get less than 30 minutes of moder ate
physical activity most days. Those who are more physical ly active may be able to consume
more while staying within the daily caloric need. To find an individual’ s daily caloric need,
go to www.myplate .gov/myplate -plan.
bSee table 10.2  for MyPlate Cup of Frui t Table.
cSee table 10.3  for MyPlate Cup of V egetables T able.
dSee table 10.4  for MyPlate Ounce-Equiv alent of Gr ains T able.
eSee table 10.5  for MyPlate Ounce-Equiv alent of Pr oteins T able.
fSee table 10.6  for MyPlate Cup of Dairy T able.
Fruit. In gener al, 1 cup of fruit or 100% fruit juice or 1/2 cup of dried fruit can be
consider ed as 1 cup f rom the Frui t Group.
Vegetables.  Any vegetable or 100% vegetable juice counts as a member of the Vegetable
Group. Vegetables may be raw or cooked; fresh, frozen, canned, or dried-deh ydrated; and
may be whole, cut up, or mashed. Vegetables in their nutrient -dense forms have limited
additions such as sal t, but ter, or cr eamy sauces.
Grains. Any food made from wheat, rice, oats, cornmeal, barley , or another cereal grain is a
grain product. Bread, pasta, breakfast cereals, tortillas, and grits are examples of grain
products. Foods such as popcorn, rice, and oatmeal are included in the grains group. Half
of one’s grains should be whole grains. Whole grains have the entire kernel, which includes
the bran, germ, and endosperm. Some whole grain examples are whole- wheat flour, bulgur ,
oatmeal, and br own rice.
Protein foods.  All foods made from meat, poultry, seafood, beans and peas, eggs,
processed soy products, nuts, and seeds are consider ed part of the Protein Foods Group.
Beans and peas are also part of the Vegetable Group. In gener al, 1 ounce of meat, poultry,
or fish; 1/4 cup cooked beans; 1 egg; 1 tablespoon of peanut butter; 1/2 ounce of nuts or
seeds; 1/4 cup (about 2 oz) of tofu; or 1 ounce of tempeh, cooked, can be consider ed as 1
ounce-equiv alent from the Protein Foods Group. Many Americans get the right amount of
protein needed from meat, poultry, and eggs but do not meet the recommendations for
seafood or nuts, seeds, and soy products. Meeting this can help increase the amount of
important nutrients the body needs, l ike unsatur ated f ats, dietary fiber , and vi tamin D .
604
Population
and age
rangeEstimated
daily
calories
for those
who are
not
physically
fitaFruitbVegetablescGrainsdProtein
foodseDairy and
fortified soy
alternativesf
Dairy. The Dairy Group includes milk, yogurt, cheese, lactose-f ree milk and fortified soy
milk, and yogurt. Foods made from milk that have little to no calcium and a high fat
content, such as cr eam cheese, cr eam, and but ter, are not consider ed dairy f oods.
U.S. Department of Agricul ture
TABLE 10.2  MyPlate Cup of Fruit Table
Fruit Amount that counts as 1 cup of fruit
Apple 1 smal l or 1/2 lar ge apple
1 cup , sliced or chopped, f resh
2/3 cup , baked
1/2 cup , dried
Applesauce 1 cup applesauce
Banana 1 large banana
1 cup , sliced
2/3 cup , mashed
Blueberries 1 cup , fresh or f rozen
1/3 cup , dried
Cantaloupe 1 cup , diced or melon bal ls
Grapes 22 seedless gr apes
1 cup , whole or cut up
Grapefruit 1 medium gr apefruit
1 cup , sections
Kiwifruit 2 to 3 kiwi fruits
1 cup , sliced or chopped
Mango 7 slices or chunks, f resh or f rozen
1 cup , fresh or f rozen
1/3 cup , dried
U.S. Department of Agricul ture
605
Fruit Amount that counts as 1 cup of fruit
Mixed fruit (fruit cocktai l) 1 cup , diced or sl iced, f resh or canned, dr ained
Orange 1 large orange
1 cup , sections
Peach 1 large peach
1 cup , sliced or diced, f resh, cook ed, frozen or
canned, dr ained
2 halv es, canned
Pear 1 medium pear
1 cup , sliced or diced, f resh, cook ed, or canned,
drained
Pineapple 1 cup , chunks, sl iced or crushed, f resh, cook ed
or canned, dr ained
Plum 3 medium or 2 lar ge plums
1 cup , sliced, f resh or cook ed
1/2 cup , dried (prunes)
Strawberries About 8 lar ge str awberries
1 cup , whole, halv ed, or sl iced, f resh or f rozen
Watermelon 1 smal l wedge or sl ice
1 cup , diced or melon bal ls
Dried f ruit (e.g. , raisins, prunes,
apricots, figs)1/2 cup dried f ruit
100% f ruit juice (e.g. , orange, apple,
grape, gr apefruit)1 cup
U.S. Department of Agricul ture
TABLE 10.3  MyPlate Cup of Vegetable Table
Vegetable
group VegetableAmount that
counts as 1 cup of
vegetables
Dark gr een
vegetablesBroccoli 1 cup , chopped or
florets, fresh or
frozen
U.S. Department of Agricul ture
606
Vegetable
group VegetableAmount that
counts as 1 cup of
vegetables
Amaranth lea ves, beet gr eens, B ok cho y, broccoli
rabe (r apini), char d, col lards (col lard greens), cr ess,
dandel ion gr eens, kale, mustar d greens, spinach,
Swiss char d, watercress1 cup , cook ed
2 cups, f resh
Raw leaf y greens:  arugula (r ocket), basi l, cilantro,
dark gr een leaf y lettuce, endiv e, escar ole, mix ed
greens, mesclun, r omaine2 cups, f resh
Red and
orange
vegetablesCarrots 2 medium carr ots
1 cup , sliced or
chopped, f resh,
cooked or f rozen
1 cup bab y carr ots
Pumpkin, calabaza 1 cup , mashed,
cooked
Red and or ange bel l peppers 1 large bel l pepper
1 cup , chopped,
fresh, or cook ed
Sweet potato 1 large sweet
potato , baked
1 cup , sliced or
mashed, cook ed
Tomatoes 1 large tomato
2 smal l tomatoes
1 cup , chopped or
sliced, f resh,
canned, or cook ed
100% v egetable juice 1 cup
Winter squash (acorn, but ternut, Hubbar d,
kabocha)1 cup , cubed,
cooked
Beans, peas,
and lenti lsDry beans and peas and lenti ls (ba yo, black, br own,
fava, garbanz o, kidney , lima, mung, na vy, pigeon,
pink, pinto , soy, or whi te beans; black -eyed peas1 cup , whole or
mashed, cook ed
U.S. Department of Agricul ture
607
Vegetable
group VegetableAmount that
counts as 1 cup of
vegetables
[cow peas] or spl it peas; and r ed, br own, and
green lenti ls)
Starchy
vegetablesCassa va 3/4 cup , cook ed
Corn, y ellow or whi te 1 large ear of corn
1 cup corn k ernels,
fresh or f rozen
Green peas 1 cup , fresh or
frozen
Plantains 3/4 cup , cook ed
White potatoes 1 medium whi te
potato , boiled or
baked
1 cup , diced,
mashed, f resh or
frozen
Other
vegetablesAspar agus 1 cup
Avocado 1 avocado
Bean spr outs 1 cup , cook ed
Cabbage, gr een, r ed, napa, sa voy 1 cup , chopped or
shredded r aw or
cooked
Cauliflower 1 cup , pieces or
florets raw or
cooked, fresh or
frozen
Celery 1 cup , diced or
sliced, r aw or
cooked
2 large stalks (11 "
to 12" long)
Cucumbers 1 cup , raw, sliced or
chopped
U.S. Department of Agricul ture
608
Vegetable
group VegetableAmount that
counts as 1 cup of
vegetables
Green or w ax beans 1 cup , raw or
cooked
Green bel l peppers 1 large bel l pepper
1 cup , chopped, r aw
or cook ed, fresh or
frozen
Lettuce, iceber g or head 2 cups, r aw,
shredded or
chopped
Mushr ooms 1 cup , raw or
cooked
Okra 1 cup , cook ed
Onions 1 cup , chopped, r aw
or cook ed
Summer squash or zuc chini 1 cup , cook ed,
sliced or diced
U.S. Department of Agricul ture
TABLE 10.4  MyPlate Ounce-Equivalent of Grains
Table
GrainAmount that counts as 1 oz equivalent of
grains
Bagels 2" mini bagel
Bagel or pi ta chips 1/3 cup bagel or pi ta chips
Barley 1/2 cup , cook ed
Buckwheat 1/2 cup , cook ed
Breads 1 regular sl ice of br ead
1 smal l slice of Fr ench br ead
4 snack -size slices of ry e bread
U.S. Department of Agricul ture
609
GrainAmount that counts as 1 oz equivalent of
grains
Bulgur 1/2 cup , cook ed
Challah br ead 1 medium or r egular sl iced
Cornbr ead 1 smal l piece
Couscous 1/2 cup , cook ed
Crackers 5 whole wheat cr ackers
2 rye crisp br eads
7 squar e or r ound cr ackers
English muf fins 1/2 Engl ish muf fin
Muffins 1 smal l muffin
Oatmeal 1/2 cup , cook ed
1 pack et instant
1 oz (1/3 cup) dry (r egular or quick)
Pancak es 1 pancak e (4-1/2 " diameter)
2 smal l pancak es (3" diameter)
Pasta (spaghet ti, macar oni,
noodles)1/2 cup , cook ed
1 oz, dry
Popcorn 3 cups, popped
Quinoa 1/2 cup , cook ed
Ready-to-eat br eakfast cer eal 1 cup , flakes or r ounds
1-1/4 cup , puffed
Rice 1/2 cup , cook ed
1 oz, dry
Tortillas 1 smal l flour torti lla (6" diameter)
1 corn torti lla (6" diameter)
U.S. Department of Agricul ture
TABLE 10.5  MyPlate Ounce-Equivalent of Proteins
Table
Protein Amount that counts as 1 oz equivalent of protein
610
Protein Amount that counts as 1 oz equivalent of protein
Meats 1 oz cook ed lean beef , goat, ham, lamb , or pork
1 oz cook ed lean gr ound beef or pork
1 slice of luncheon or del i meats (beef , chick en, ham, pork, turk ey)
1 oz cook ed game meats (bear , bison, deer , elk, moose, opossum, r abbit,
venison)
1 oz cook ed organ meats
Poultry 1 oz cook ed (wi thout skin) chick en, ostrich, or turk ey
2 oz cook ed Cornish hen, duck, goose, pheasant, or quai l
1 sandwich sl ice of turk ey or chick en breast (4-1/2 " × 2-1/2 " × 1/8 ")
Seafood 1 oz cook ed finfish (black sea bass, catfish, cod, flounder , freshwater
trout, haddock, hak e, hal ibut, herring, l ight tuna, mack erel, mul let, per ch,
pollock, salmon, sea bass, snapper , sole, ti lapia, whi ting)
1 oz cook ed shel lfish (clams, cr ab, crayfish, lobster , mussels, octopus,
oysters, scal lops, shrimp , squid [calamari])
1 oz canned fish (ancho vies, f reshwater tr out, herring, l ight tuna, salmon,
sardines)
Eggs 1 egg
1-1/2 egg whi tes (or 3 tbsp l iquid egg whi te product)
Nuts, seeds,
and so y
products1/2 oz of nuts (12 almonds, 24 pistachios, 7 w alnut halv es)
1/2 oz of seeds (chia, flax, pumpkin, sesame, sunflower , or squash
seeds), hul led, roasted
1 tbsp of almond, cashew , peanut, or sunflower but ter, or sesame paste
(tahini)
1/4 cup (about 2 oz) of tof u
1 oz tempeh, cook ed
Beans, peas,
and lenti ls1/4 cup of cook ed beans, peas, or lenti ls (ba yo, black, br own, f ava,
garbanz o, kidney , lima, mung, na vy, pigeon, pink, pinto , soy, or whi te
beans; black -eyed peas [cow peas] or spl it peas; and r ed, br own, and
green lenti ls)
1/4 cup of bak ed beans or r efried beans
1 falafel pat ty (2-1/4 ", 4 oz)
6 tbsp hummus
U.S. Department of Agricul ture
TABLE 10.6  MyPlate Cup of Dairy Table
Dairy Amount that counts as 1 cup of dairy
611
Dairy Amount that counts as 1 cup of dairy
Milk 1 cup mi lk
1 half-pint container mi lk
1/2 cup ev aporated mi lk
1 cup calcium-f ortified so y milk
1 half-pint container calcium-f ortified so y milk
Yogurt 1 cup y ogurt (dairy or f ortified so y)
Cheese 1-1/2 oz har d cheese (cheddar , mozzar ella, Swiss, P armesan)
1/3 cup shr edded cheese
1 oz pr ocessed cheese (American)
1/2 cup ricot ta cheese
2 cups cot tage cheese
2 oz queso f resco
2 slices queso blanco
U.S. Department of Agricul ture
612