# Chapter 10: Basic Nutritional Factors Affecting Health

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

**PDF Pages:** 536--612

CHAPTER  10
BASIC NUTRITIONAL
FACTORS AFFECTING HEALTH
Cassandra Forsythe, PhD, RD
The author would like to acknowledge the significant contribution of Marie Spano to this
chapter .
After completing this chapter, you will be able to
know when to r efer an athlete to the appr opriate r esour ce,
such as a medical doctor or a sports dieti tian;
identi fy the pr otein, carboh ydrate, and f at recommendations
for athletes;
list the dietary r ecommendations f or disease pr evention and
overall heal th; and
list hydration and electr olyte guidel ines f or different age gr oups
and scenarios and help athletes dev elop an individual ized
hydration plan.
Good nutrition provides athletes with the nutrients necessary for
gener al health, growth, development, and repairing and building
muscle tissue, as well as the energy needed to train, compete, and
maintain mental focus and concentr ation. A nutrition plan that is
tailored to an athlete’ s specific needs can help decrease risk of
injuries and illness and maximiz e training adaptations (improvements
536
made from training) while helping the athlete reach his or her
performance goals. This chapter focuses on the scienti fic rationale
for performance-enhancing nutrition practices while providing
suggestions that will help readers apply sports nutrition science to
real-life scenarios.
Despi te the plethor a of credible nutrition information easily
available online, knowledge among NCAA collegiate athletes is poor
and does not meet current recommendations (135). In addition,
nutrition guide lines created for the gener al public are not necessari ly
applicable to athletes. Because each athlete’ s nutrition needs depend
on many factors (age; body size and composi tion; sex; genetics;
environmental training condi tions; injuries; medical nutrition needs;
and duration, frequency , and intensi ty of training) , nutrition
requirements can vary tremendously between athletes, even if they
play the same position. Finally, because nutrition is a complex,
constantly evolving science, it is important for strength and
condi tioning professionals to have some basic nutrition knowledge in
addition to a list of nutrition professionals they can refer athletes to
for individual ized nutri tion advice based on the latest science.
537
Role of Sports Nutrition Professionals
Sports nutrition is a complex multidiscipl inary field, and athletic
trainers, strength and condi tioning professionals, physicians, exercise
scientists, and food service providers have varying degrees of
nutrition knowledge. Job responsibi lities of player development staff
should be outlined based on the nutrition education and knowledge
of the staff member, the type of nutrition information provided, and
state l icensur e laws regarding nutri tion pr actice.
All sports nutrition professionals should be able to answer basic
nutrition questions (for example, “What are some healthy snack
ideas?”). Howev er, athletes with complex nutrition issues should be
referred to the appropriate resour ce, either a team physician or
sports dietitian. The team physician is responsible for overseeing the
athlete’ s medic al care while the sports dietitian is responsible for
providing individual ized dietary advice. A sports dietitian  is a
register ed dietitian (also referred to as a register ed dietitian
nutritionist ) with specific education and experience in sports
nutrition. The Academ y of Nutrition and Dietetics (AND) Board
Certified Specialist in Sports Dietetics (CSSD) certification
distinguishes register ed dietitians with expertise in sports nutrition
from other register ed dietitians who special ize in other areas of
nutrition (see the sidebar  on this topic). Though some sports
dietitians have complementary skills or training and may therefore
be social workers, athletic trainers, or chefs, a compr ehensiv e sports
nutrition program requires full-time attention; therefore, these
secondary skills should be consider ed a complement to the sports
dietitian’s knowledge rather than be used to try to fill two distinct job
positions with one individual.  Finally, higher -level positions gener ally
include a sports dietitian with a master ’s degree, PhD, or both. A
sports dietitian can help athletes make the connection between plate
and perf ormance.
538
What Is a Board Certified Specialist in
Sports Dietetics (CSSD)?
According to the Commission on Dietetic Registr ation, the credential ing agency for
the Academ y of Nutrition and Dietetics, a CSSD “provides individual and
group/team counsel ing and education to enhance the performance of comp etitive
and recreational athletes. ” Their r esponsibi lities include:
Counsel ing individuals and groups on daily nutrition for performance and
health
Translating the latest scienti fic evidence into practical sports nutrition
recommendations
Tracking and documenting outcomes of nutrition services, serving as a food
and nutri tion resour ce for coaches, support staf f, and f amilies
Some of the tasks that an individu al with a CSSD certification can conduct
according to the CS SD exam content outl ine include:
Interpr eting body composi tion assessments on activ e individuals
Developing appr opriate body composi tion goals
Estimating total ener gy expendi ture
Assessing fluid and electr olyte balance in tr aining, perf ormance, and r ecovery
Evaluating and educating on dietary supplements, beverages, ergogenic aids
using evidence-bas ed analyses for training, performance, hydration, and
recovery
Contributing to collaborative interv entions for and monitoring of disordered
eating to guide sport participation
Adapted from Commission on Dietetic Registration, “Specialty Practice Experience,” accessed August 22,
2025, https://www.cdrnet.org/specialty-practice-experience.; Commission on Dietetic Registration, “CSSD
Examination Content Online,” last modified September 21, 2023, https://www.cdrnet.org/vault/2459/web/
/CDR%20CSSD%20ECO%202023%20-%20effective%2011-2023.pdf.
At times, physicians and sports dietitians may work together to
help athletes with eating disorders, nutrient deficiencies, or specific
disease states such as diabetes. Because an athlete’ s nutrition and
medical information may be shared with other memb ers of the
player development or coach ing staff or family members in order to
provide compr ehensiv e care, in the United States all staff should
follow Health Insurance Portabi lity and Accountabi lity Act (HIPAA)
guidel ines f or handl ing an athlete’ s protected heal th information.
539
A sports nutrition coach is a professional who is not a register ed
dietitian but has basic training in nutrition and exercise science. For
example, the strength and condi tioning professional can act as a
sports nutrition coach, providing basic nutrition education and
suggestions. More complex situations in which food or nutrition is
being used to treat or manage a medical condi tion (that includes a
nutrient deficiency) require medical nutrition therapy and fall under
the role of the sports dietitian. Sports nutrition coaches may obtain
additional education by getting a sports nutrition certification. For
example, the National Academ y of Sports Medicine (NASM) has a
Certified Sports Nutrition Coach certification designed for personal
trainers, health coaches, group fitness instructors, and health care
professionals. Also, the International Society of Sports Nutrition
(ISSN) Sports Nutrition Special ist (SNS) Certification requires a high
school diploma  for the exam and is geared toward person al trainers
or other fitness professional s who do not hold a four-year college
degree. The ISSN also has a Certified Sports Nutritionist credential
(CISSN), which requires a four-year under graduate degree in a
related field; or be practicin g in the field of sports nutrition for at
least five years; or be certified as a personal trainer by the NSCA,
ACE, or ACSM; and is intended for health, fitness, and medical
professionals who work wi th athletes and activ e individuals.
A sports nutritionist with an advanced degree is a professional
who may work in the sports nutrition industry or conduct resear ch in
the area of sports nutrition and would therefore be able to discuss
the literature on a particular topic. The sports nutritionist with an
advanced degree may also choose to obtain a sports nutrition
certification. One option is the IOC (International Olympic
Commi ttee) Diploma in Sports Nutrition. This two-year online
program includ es coursewor k, seminars, tutorials, and laboratory
practical work. The IOC states that students interested in this course
typical ly have a degree in nutrition or dietetics, biological sciences
(including biochemistry , physiology , or sport science), or medicine.
540
All sports nutrition professionals must follow state nutrition
licensur e laws, which vary from state to state and specify who is
allowed to provide individual ized nutrition counsel ing and medical
nutrition therapy. For instance, in Louisiana, gener al nutrition
education can be provided by various discipl ines if the information is
gener al, accurate, and not individual ized (based on a specific
person’ s dietary needs). Howev er, only a licensed dietitian or
nutritionist can provide nutrition assessment and counsel ing.
Nutrition counsel ing is defined as “the provision of the individual
guidance on appropriate food and nutrient intake for those with
special needs, taking into consider ation health, cultural,
socioeconomic, functional, and psychological facts from the nutrition
assessment. Nutrition counsel ing may include advice to increase or
decrease nutrie nts in the diet; to change the timing and size of and
composi tion of meals; to modify food textur es, and in extreme
instances, to change the r oute of administr ation” ( www.lbedn .org).
Many individuals without any (or with minimal) education in
nutrition and exercise science and little to no formal training refer to
themselv es as sports nutritionists. Regardless of the specific title of
the person providing sports nutrition information or individual ized
dietary advice, strength and condi tioning professionals should take a
close look at the person’ s education (including the curriculum),
previous work history (especial ly the person’ s day-to-da y job duties),
knowledge of sports nutri tion, and y ears of experience.
Experienced sports dietitians help athletes make the
connection between plate  and performance. They  have
advanced knowledge, skills, and expertise in sports
nutrition.
The first step in nutrition coaching involves defining the athlete’ s
goals and identi fying the coach’ s goals (since the two may be
different). After this, similar to the strength and condi tioning
professional undertaking a needs analysis, the sports dietitian will
541
take a detailed look at the athlete’ s diet, individual food preferences
(including cultural and religious consider ations), cooking skills,
access to food, financial constr aints, barriers to making wise dietary
choices, supplement use, weight and body composi tion history ,
medical history , training program, and injuries. The sports dietitian
will then work with the athlete to develop a plan that fits his or her
lifestyle and taste preferences while including the appropriate calorie
level; macronutrients and micronutrients in recommended amounts;
adequate fluids and electr olytes; and supplements as necessary to
help correct a nutrient deficiency , make up for potential nutrient
shortf alls, or meet tr aining goals.
FIGURE 10.1  The MyPlate icon.
U.S. Department of Agriculture
542
Standard Nutrition Guidelines
For general nutrition information, strength and conditioning
professionals may want to refer their athletes to MyPlate , a food
guidance system created by the U.S. Department of Agricul ture in
2011 and based on the Dietary Guidel ines for Americans to help
consumers make better food choices (100). MyPlate icon illustrates
the five food groups based on a mealtime visual, the place setting
(figure 10.1). Another helpful resour ce geared more toward athletes
is the Performance Enhancing Plate from the Collegiate and
Professional Sports Dietitians Association (CPSDA, www.sportsr d
.org). This plate encourages athletes on hard training days to make
half their plate whole grains to fuel muscles, followed by 1/4 of the
plate f rom fruits and v egetables and the other 1/4 f rom pr oteins.
MyPlate Guideline s and Recommendations
Information related to MyPlate can be found at www.myplate .gov.
Although the basic guidel ines represented by the MyPlate icon and
corresponding educational materials are universal, they include
calorie guide lines and portion recommendations for fruits,
vegetables, grains, protein foods, and dairy and fortified soy
alternativ es, based on age and sex for individuals who get less than
30 minutes of moder ate physical activity most days, as noted in
tables 10.1 to 10.6 on pages 221 through 226. Those who are more
physical ly active should adjust the guidel ines to meet their specific
dietary needs (143). Additional key nutritional topics for MyPlate
include guidel ines for oils, added sugars, saturated fats, sodium, and
alcohol. Oils are not a food group but provide important nutrients
such as mono- and polyun saturated fats and vitamin E. Added
sugars are sugars and syrups that are added to foods or beverages
when they are made. To build healthy eating habits and stay within
calorie needs, people over age 2 should eat foods and drink
beverages with little or no added sugars; athletes who need
hydration beverages with added sugars are the exception to this
543
recommendation (3). Saturated fat is fat that is often found solid at
room temperature. Examples of these include milk fat, butter, or the
fat inside or around meat. Ideally, saturated fat should be limited in
the diet and the focus should be on unsatur ated fats such as liquid
oils used in cooking. In a gener al, nonactiv e populatio n, sodium
should also be minimiz ed in the diet to no more than 2,300
milligrams per day, but health recommendations for lower salt intake
may not be appropriate for endurance athletes and those who sweat
a lot. Alcohol has calories but few nutrients; adults of legal drinking
age who choose to drink should do so in moder ation.
MyPlate should  be consider ed a starting point that athletes can
use to evaluate their diet. In gener al, if a diet provides a variety of
foods from each group, it is more likely to contain an adequate
amount of each macronutrient, vitamin, and miner al. However, if the
diet excludes an entire food group, specific nutrients may be lacking.
For example, an athlete who excludes dairy from the diet may have
a tough time meeting his or her nutrition requirements for calcium
and vitamin D (in fortified milk and fortified yogurts). Fortified soy
alternativ es are viewed by the USDA as the only plant-based milk
alternativ e equiv alent to milk, whereas other nondairy milk
alternativ es do not have the same nutritional value as milk and must
be chosen carefully to avoid deficiencies in calcium and vitamin D
(45). Added sugars are also a concern in plant-based milk
alternativ es. Individuals who exclude all animal foods and fish might
not meet their vitamin B12 needs. B12 is found in meat, poultry, fish,
eggs, and dairy foods, though some breakfast cereals, nondairy milk
alternativ es, meat substi tutes, and nutritional yeast are fortified with
B12. Thus, it is highly recommended that individuals who exclude
food groups work with their sports dietitian to find suitable
replacements or replacement combinations to ensur e that they meet
their nutrient r equirements f or heal th and perf ormance.
Foods within each food group share similar nutrient composi tions
and are consider ed interchangeable; howev er, a variety of foods
should be consumed within each group. For example, eating an
544
orange, an apple, and a pear provides a broader array of essential
nutrients than is provided by three apples. A diet providing a variety
of foods from each group is more likely to meet a person’ s
macronutrient  (carbohydrate, protein, and fat) as well as
micronutrient  (vitamins and miner als) needs.
The resour ces section of the MyPlate websi te offers several tools
to help plan a healthy diet. MyPlate Plan gives food group targets of
what and how much to eat within a person’ s calorie allowance based
on age, sex, height, weight, and physical activity level. It also comes
as an app, MyPlate App, to help build healthy habits, pick daily food
goals, and set real-time progress. Further , there is the Shop Simple
with MyPlate Tool that can be used to find cost-saving food-
purchasing methods and new w ays to pr epare budget -friendly f oods.
Dietary Reference Intakes
Because athletes eat food, not individual nutrients, dietary
recommendations should be presented in terms of specific food
choices. Howev er, it is also important to have an understanding of
the athlete’ s nutrient requirements in order to make food
recommendations. The Dietary Refe rence Intakes (DRIs) ,
developed by the U.S. Department of Agricul ture (USDA) and of
Health and Human Services (HHS), are a complete set of nutrient
intakes for use when evaluating and planning diets for healthy
individuals. The DRIs are listed for the macronutrients as well as
micronutrients, electr olytes, and water (71-75, 109, 118, 164). The
DRIs are based on the body of literature regarding nutrient intake
and the reduction of chronic disease, as opposed to simply
prevention of dietary deficiencies (115). Because nutrient intake can
vary consider ably from day to day, the DRIs apply to a person’ s
usual intake. Therefore, when a sports dietitian assesses a person’ s
nutrient intake, they look at several days in order to get an average
daily intake for each nutrient. This is especial ly true with regard to
evaluating intake of nutrient s found in few foods or in very small
amounts in foods (115). Fewer days’ worth of food records are
545
needed to get a good estimation of average protein intake, since this
does not vary much from day to day (115). The DRIs include the
following:
Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA)— The average daily
nutrient requirement adequate for meeting the needs of nearly all
(97%-98%) healthy people within each life stage and sex; often
used to plan nutri tional ly adequate diets f or people.
Adequate Intake (AI)— The average daily nutrient intake level
recommended when a RDA cannot be establ ished.
Tolerable Upper Intake Level (UL)— The maximum average
daily nutrient level not associated with any adverse health effects.
Intakes above the UL increase potential risk of adverse effects.
(The UL represents intake from all sources including food, water,
and supplements. )
Estimated Average Requirement (EAR)— The average daily
nutrient intake level consider ed sufficient to meet the needs of
half of the heal thy population wi thin each l ife stage and sex.
The Dietary Guidel ines for Americans 2020-2025 has identified
several dietary nutrients that are under -consumed by the public
(males and females in all age groups); these nutrients are identi fied
as the Nutrients of Public Health Concern and include dietary fiber,
vitamin D, calcium, and potassium (56). Dietary patterns that do not
meet the recommended intakes of fruits, vegetables, and whole
grains are often lacking in adequate dietary fiber and potassium.
More than 90 percent of women and 97 percent of men do not meet
recommended intakes for dietary fiber. Potassium-rich foods include
vegetables, fruits, dairy, and protein foods, particularly white baked
potatoes, acorn squash, cooked spinach, cooked plantain s, kiwifruit,
100% orange juice, banana s, and plain nonfat or low-fat yogurt.
Dairy foods, fortified beverages (e.g., soy beverages and orange
juice), and canned sardines and salmon are excellent sources of
calcium, while fatty fish, fortified beverages (e.g., milk, orange juice,
soy beverages), and fortified yogurt are excellent sources of vitamin
546
D. Also, iron is a concern for specific populations, particul arly female
athletes (149). Iron-deficient anemia and iron deficiency are five to
seven times more common in female athletes than male athletes.
Shellfish (e.g., oysters and mussels), iron-fortified cereals, dark leafy
greens (e.g., spinach), and soybeans are excellent sources of iron,
providing 20% or more of the daily value for iron per serving; red
meat and poul try ar e consider ed good sour ces (41a).
For More Information on Nutrition
Strength and condi tioning professionals  can rely on the following websi tes for more
information about nutri tion:
DRI Calculator for Healthcare Professionals (based on the DRIs, this dietary
planning tool calculates dai ly nutrient r ecommendations):
www .nal.usda .gov/human -nutrition -and -food -safety /dri-calculator
National I nstitutes of Heal th—Of fice of Dietary Supplements:
https:// ods.od.nih.gov
The Dietary Supplement Label Database (DSLD) from the Office of Dietary
Supplements (ODS) at the National Institutes of Health (NIH) captur es all
information printed on labels of dietary supplement products sold in the United
States and can be used by consumers to learn more about ingredients listed
within the Supplement F acts label b y clicking on ingr edient names:
https:// dsld.od.nih.gov
The Healthy Living and Weight section  of the USDA Nutrition.go v websi te gives
information and support for establ ishing and maintaining a positive body image
through healthy eating habits, strategies for success to help someone to lose or
gain weight safely and effectively, weight management for children and teens,
and information on how to evaluate claims made by weight -loss products and
diets:
www .nutrition .gov/topics /healthy -living -and -weight
Peer-reviewed journal articles:
www .pubmed .gov
Collegiate and Pr ofessional Sports Dieti tians Association:
www .sportsrd .org
International S ociety of Sports Nutri tion:
www .sportsnutritionsociety .org
Sports and Human P erformance Nutri tion (SHPN):
547
https:// www .shpndpg .org/home
548
Macronutrients
A macronutrien t is a nutrient that is required in significant amounts
in the diet. Three important classes of macronutrients are protein,
carboh ydrate, and f at.
Protein
Protein  is the primary  structur al and functional component of every
cell in the human body (164). Dietary proteins are used for growth
and development and to build and repair cells; they also serve as
enzymes, transport carriers, and hormones. Therefore, dietary
protein intake is essential for maintaining health, reproduction, and
cellular structur e and f unction (164).
Proteins are composed of carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, and
nitrogen. Amino  means “nitrogen containing, ” and amino acids  are
the molecules that, when joined in groups of a few dozen to
hundr eds, form the thousands of proteins occurring in nature.
Proteins in the human body are composed of various combinations
of the 20 individual amino acids. Nine amino acids are “essential”
because the body cannot manuf acture them—they must be obtained
through the diet. Four amino acids can be synthesiz ed by the human
body and are therefore consider ed “nonessential” because they do
not need to be consumed in the diet. Finally, seven amino acids are
consider ed condi tional ly essential. These amino acids are typical ly
not essential but become essential, and therefore must be obtained
through the diet, during times of illness and stress. The amino acids
are listed in table 10. 7.
TABLE 10.7  Essential, Nonessential, and
Conditionally Essential Amino Acids
Essential Nonessential Conditionally essential
Histidine Alanine Arginine
Based on Institute of Medicine Standing Commi ttee on the Scientific Evaluation of Dietary
Reference I ntakes, Food and Nutri tion B oard (2005), 593.
549
Essential Nonessential Conditionally essential
Isoleucine
Leucine
Lysine
Methionine
Phenylalanine
Threonine
Tryptophan
ValineAspar agine
Aspartic acid (aspartate)
Glutamic acid (glutamate)Cysteine (cystine)
Glutamine
Glycine
Proline
Serine
Tyrosine
Based on Institute of Medicine Standing Commi ttee on the Scientific Evaluation of Dietary
Reference I ntakes, Food and Nutri tion B oard (2005), 593.
Amino acids are joined together by peptide bonds. Two amino
acids together are referred to as a dipeptide , and several amino
acids together are referred to as a polypeptide . Polypeptide chains
bond together to form a multitude of proteins with various structur es
and functions.  Almost half of the body’s protein reserv e exists as
skeletal muscl e, while approximately 15% makes up structur al
tissues including skin and blood. The rest of the body’s protein
reserv es are in viscer al tissues such as the liver and kidney and in
the bones (47).
Protein Quality and Dietary Recommendations
Protein quality is determined by amino acid content and protein
digestibility , as calculated by how much of the protein’ s nitrogen is
absorbed during digestion and its ability to provide the amino acids
necessary for growth, maintenance, and repair. Higher-quality
proteins are highly digestible  and contain all of the essential amino
acids. Animal-based proteins—including eggs, dairy foods, meat,
fish, and poultry—contain all of the essential amino acids, while soy,
quinoa, and buckwheat are the only plant-based proteins that
contain all nine essential amino acids. In gener al, plant proteins are
less digestible than anima l proteins, though digest ibility can
sometimes be improved through processing and preparation (110,
164). Although measur es of protein quality, such as the protein
digestibility correct amino  acid score (PDCAAS) , take protein
550
digestibi lity (or bioavailability ) into account as well as a protein’ s
ability to provide the essential amino acids necessary for the
synthesis of body proteins and other metabol ites, they do not take
into account how other compounds within the food alter the
bioavailability of the protein’s amino acids. Foods contain
antinutri tional factors—compounds that reduce the digestion and
absorption of a nutrient, making it less available for use by the body
(92). Several antinutri tional factors lead to digestiv e losses and
structur al changes of amino acids that limit amino acid bioavailability
(110). For instance, during cooking, some foods will brown; this
browning, called a Maillard reactio n, leads to compounds that can
decrease the bioavailability of certain amino acids. Although the
majori ty of plant-based foods fall short in one or more essential
amino acids, all people, not just vegetarians and vegans  (those who
consume only plants and plant products—no meat, fish, poultry,
eggs, milk, or other foods that come from animals), can meet their
protein needs by consuming a variety of plant foods including
legumes, vegetables, seeds, nuts, rice, and whole grains that
provide different amino acids so that all essential amino acids are
consumed over the course of the day (152). Novel plant-based meat
alternativ es are also an emerging option to meet dietary protein
needs, particu larly given that our world population is growing and
living longer , and animal proteins alone cannot sustain all of our
protein needs.
While dietary  recommend ations are stated as protein
requirements, the actual requirement is for amino acids.  The need
for amino acids in sedentary , healthy adults results from the
constant turno ver of cells and cellular proteins. During cell turno ver
—the constant breakdown and regener ation of cells—the body’s free
amino acid pool is the immed iate and largest supplier of amino acids
(105). The pool is replenished from dietary protein digestion, as well
as the amino acids released from tissue turno ver. Substantial ly more
protein is turned over daily than is ordinari ly consumed, indicating
that amino acids are recycled (119). This process is not completely
551
efficient, howe ver, so dietary amino acid intake is required to replace
losses.
The RDA for protein for men and women 19 years of age and
older, based on nitrogen balance studies, is 0.8 grams of high-qual ity
protein per kilogram body weight per day (164). Children, teens, and
pregnant and lactating women have higher dietary protein needs as
reflected in the RDA for these groups. Howev er, protein needs are
inversely proportional to calorie intake because small amounts of
protein can be metabol ized as a source of energy when a person is
in a state of negativ e calorie balance, when fewer calories are
consumed than are expended (e.g., typical ly only 1%-6% of total
caloric expendi ture in most circumstances but up to 10% during
prolonged exercise in a glycogen-depleted state) (98, 164). In this
case, the protein cannot be used for the intended purpose of
replacing the amino acid pool. When caloric intake goes down,
protein requirement goes up (101). Therefore, the Institute of
Medicine (IOM) establ ished an Acceptable Macronutrient
Distribution Range (AMDR)  for protein, which covers a wide
range of protein intake. The AMDR is 5% to 20% of total calories for
children ages 1 to 3 years, 10% to 30% of total calories for children
ages 4 to 18 years, and 10% to 35% of total calories for adults older
than age 18 years (164). Adult men and women typical ly consume
an average of 16% of their calories from protein (68). The AMDR for
a nutrient includes a range of intakes associated with reduced risk of
chronic disease while still providing adequate intakes of other
essential nutrients (118). Though the DRI for protein fits within the
AMDR, the DRI is based solely on body weight and therefore does
not take low or high calori e intakes into account. Based on the
AMDR, when calorie intake is lower, protein needs to go up as a
percentage of total calorie intake by approximately 1% for every
100-calorie decrease below 2,000 calories. When total calorie intake
is higher, protein needs, expressed as a percentage of total caloric
intake, go down to a certain point. In practice, sports dietitians
552
should first establ ish an athlete’ s protein intake and then add
carboh ydrate and f ats as determined b y total calorie needs (95).
Concerns About the RDA for Protein
Contr oversy surrounds the RDA for protein since some scientists
suggest that adults should consume more than the RDA for bone
health (59), weight management, and building and repairing muscle
(122, 123). In addition, resear ch suggests that higher-protein,
lower -carboh ydrate diets can favorably affect blood lipids,
particularly in obese individua ls, and therefore also decrease some of
the risk factors for cardiovascular disease and metabol ic syndr ome
(94).
Protein is a building block for strong bones, contributing to 50%
of bone volume and 33% of bone mass (96). Protein’ s effect on
bone may be due, in part, to its influence on insulin-like growth
factor-1 (IGF-1), which is produced in the liver and promotes bone
and muscle formation (144). Though resear ch suggests that
supplemental, but not dietary , protein increases calcium losses
through urine, in healthy individuals consuming 0.7 to 2.1 grams of
protein per kilogram body weight, both urinary calcium excretion and
intestinal calcium absorption increase (88). In fact, low dietary
protein intake (0.7 g protein per kg body weight per day) suppr esses
intestinal calciu m absorption  (87). The effects of protein on bone
health have been the center of some controversy, but experimental
studies gener ally indicate that dietary protein supports bone health
when consume d as part of a high-qual ity whole-f ood diet containing
adequate calciu m. Howev er, future high-qual ity experimental studies
are necessary to fully understand the interactive effects of dietary
protein and diet qual ity on bone heal th (37).
Protein also plays a multifaceted role in weight management.
First, it promotes satiet y in a dose-dependent manner: Greater
amounts of protein lead to a greater increase in satiet y (48).
Howev er, the satiating effect of protein also depends on the timing
of protein intake, form (solid vs. liquid), concurr ent intake of other
553
macronutrients, and time until the next meal (4). The type of protein
may also have an effect on satiet y, though resear ch has not fully
elucidated which proteins may have the greatest impact (16, 101).
Protein also has the greatest thermic effect of feeding—mor e
calories are burned during the digestion of protein as compar ed to
carboh ydrate or fat. Finally, higher protein diets help spare muscle
loss whi le a person is on a r educed-calorie diet (93, 132).
The amino acids in protein are used for growth (including muscle
growth) and for repairing  tissue, synthesizing enzymes and
hormones, and repairing and making new cells. Though adults in a
gener al fitness program can likely meet their protein requirements
by consuming 0.8 to 1.0 gram of protein per kilogram body weight
per day, athletes and those  who exercise intensely require more
protein (76). Traditional ly, aerobic endur ance athletes have placed
less of a priority on protein in comparison to carboh ydrate; howev er,
adequate protein intake and timing are crucial for optimal
performance. Protein recommendations for aerobic endur ance
athletes are 1.2 to 2.0 grams of protein per kilogram body weight
per day (167). For building muscle mass and for maintaining muscle
mass through a positive muscle protein balance, an overall daily
protein intake in the range of 1.4 to 2.0 grams of protein per
kilogram body weight per day is ideal (76). Athletes who are on a
reduced-calorie diet may need more protein per day to preserv e
muscle tissue during weight loss (76).
In addition to eating the right amount of protein per day, resear ch
supports the idea of athletes consuming sufficient protein as soon as
possible after exercise, when muscle tissue is most receptiv e to
amino acids in order to maximize muscle growth (76). In fact, after
exercise, both muscle protein synthesis  and breakdo wn are
increased, though net protein balance is negativ e when the exercise
is done in a fasted state (127). Protein consumed after exercise
increases muscle protein synthesis, and muscles remain sensitive to
protein ingestion for at least 24 hours following a resistance training
bout (114). Reviews surrounding postex ercise protein ingestion have
554
suggested that when recommended levels of protein are consumed,
the effect of protein timing appears to be, at best, minimal; total
daily protein intake is the most important factor in promoting
exercise-induced muscle growth (5, 140). While nutrient timing of
protein potenti ally can be a beneficial strategy for enhancing muscle
protein synthesis, the effects on muscle hypertr ophy ultimately
depend on the timing of the prework out protein meal; the closer the
meal is to the training session, the less need for immediate
postwork out protein intake (140). To maximiz e muscle growth,
consume high-qual ity protein (at a dose of approximately  0.4 to 0.5
g of protein per kg of lean body mass) both before and after
exercise within about 4 to 6 hours of each other, depending on meal
size (140). Athletes with high body masses may struggle to consume
enough protein to meet required daily needs. Therefore, it is
recommended that these athletes consume high-qual ity protein
immediately to 2 hours after exercise (86). Ingesting 20 to 40 grams
of high-qual ity protein every 3 to 4 hours throughout the day
appears to most favorably affect muscle protein synthe sis and is
associated with improved body composi tion and performance
outcomes, particularly in strength athletes (86). Aerobic endur ance
athletes may benefi t from the addition of high-qual ity protein during
endur ance exercise in addition to their regular carboh ydrate intake
to suppr ess muscle damage and impr ove feelings of sor eness (76).
Concerns surrounding protein intakes above the RDA are
unfounded for the most part in healthy individuals (105). Proteins
consumed in excess of the amount needed for the synthesis of
tissue are broken down (103), the nitrogen is excreted as urea in
urine, and the remaining ketoacids are either used directly as
sources of energy or converted to carboh ydrate (gluconeogenesis )
or body fat (64). In fact, a study examining high protein intake in
athletes found that protein intakes up to 2.8 grams per kilogram
body weight (as assessed by a seven-da y diet record) did not impair
any measures of renal function (130). The strength and conditioning
professional should be aware that consistently high protein intakes,
555
above recommended levels for building and repairing muscle, are
not recommended because carboh ydrate and fat intake (and the
nutrients commonly found in carboh ydrate- and fat-rich foods) may
be compr omised. The protein content of commonly consumed foods
is listed in table 10.8 .
Athletes requ ire more than the RDA for protein to build
and repair muscle. Depending on the sport and the
training program, 1.2 to 2.0 grams per kilogram body
weight of protein is recommended.
Carbohydrate
Carbohydrate  primari ly serves as a source of energy. Howev er,
carboh ydrate is not an essential nutrient, because the body can
break down the carbon skeletons of certain amino acids and convert
them into glucose (i.e., gluconeogenesis). Carboh ydrates are
composed of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen. Carboh ydrates can be
classified into three groups according to the number of sugar
(saccharide) units they contain: monosac charides, disaccharides,
and polysac charides.
Monosaccharides  (glucose , fructose , and galactose ) are
single-sugar molecules. In the body, glucose is present as circulating
sugar in the blood, where it is used as the primary energy substr ate
for cells. In addition, glucose molecules make up glycogen, a
polysac charide stored in muscle and liver cells. In food, glucose is
typical ly combined with other monosac charides to form various
sugars, such as sucrose. Isolated glucose found in candy or sport
drinks is found in the form of dextrose, a chemical isomer of
glucose. Fructose has the same chemical formula as glucose, but
because the atoms are arranged differently, it tastes much sweeter
and has different properties. Fructose accounts for the sweet taste
of honey and occurs naturally in fruits and vegetables. In the body,
fructose causes less insulin secretion than other sugars, which has
made it a focus of much resear ch in the area of aerobic endur ance
556
performance. Galactose, the third monosac charide, combines with
glucose to f orm lactose, mi lk sugar .
TABLE 10.8  Protein Content of Common Foods
FoodServing
sizeServing size in
gramsAverage amount of protein
(in grams) per serving
Almonds 1/4 cup 39 8
Bacon, pork 3 slices 27.3 11
Beef, ground, 80% lean,
pan br owned3 oz 85 23
Black beans 1/2 cup 92.5 7.5
Cashews 1/4 cup 32 5.5
Cheese, f eta 1 oz 28 4
Cheese sl ice, cheddar 1 slice 21 5.5
Cheese sl ice, S wiss 1 slice 28 7.5
Cheese, string, part
skim1 oz (1
stick)28 7
Chicken breast 3 oz 85 25
Chicken, thigh wi th skin 1 111 28
Clams, in shel l 3 oz 85 22
Cottage cheese, 1% 4 oz 113 14
Deli turkey 5 oz 142 19
Edamame 1/2 cup 73.5 8.5
Egg, whole, lar ge 1 56 7
Garbanz o beans 1/3 cup 83.5 6
Goat cheese, soft 1 oz 28 5
Greek y ogurt, nonf at 6 oz 170 17
Data from U.S. Department of Agricul ture, Agricul tural Resear ch Service, Beltsville Human
Nutrition R esear ch Center . FoodData Centr al. Available f rom https:// fdc.nal.usda .gov/.
557
FoodServing
sizeServing size in
gramsAverage amount of protein
(in grams) per serving
Hambur ger pat ty 3 oz 85 22
Herring, pickled ¼ cup 35 5
Hot dog, beef 1 50 6
Kidney beans 1/2 cup 88.5 7.5
Kielbasa, beef polska 2 oz 56 7
Lamb chop 3 oz 85 24
Lima beans 1/2 cup 94 7
Lobster , steamed 3 oz 85 16
Mahimahi fish, bak ed 3 oz 85 20
Milk, 1%, low -fat 8 fl oz 245 8
Mussels, steamed 3 oz 85 20
Oysters, r aw 4 oz 113 6.5
Peanut but ter 2 tbsp 32 8
Peanuts 1/4 cup 35.5 9
Pistachios 1/4 cup 30.5 7
Pork, ham 3 oz 85 15
Pork tenderloin 3 oz 85 23
Salmon, canned 2 oz 56 13
Salmon, fi let, bak ed 3 oz 85 17
Sausage l inks 3 links 63 10
Shrimp , large 4 22 5
Sirloin steak 3 oz 85 26
Soy milk 8 fl oz 245 8
Soy nuts 1/4 cup 23 9
Data from U.S. Department of Agricul ture, Agricul tural Resear ch Service, Beltsville Human
Nutrition R esear ch Center . FoodData Centr al. Available f rom https:// fdc.nal.usda .gov/.
558
FoodServing
sizeServing size in
gramsAverage amount of protein
(in grams) per serving
Tilapia, fi let, bak ed 3 oz 85 22
Tortilla, flour , 8 in. 1 51 4.5
Trout, fi let, bak ed 3 oz 85 20
Tuna, canned 3 oz (1/2
can)85 22
Turkey breast, r oasted 3 oz 85 25
Turkey, ground cook ed 3 oz 85 23
Turkey, sausage smok ed 1 oz 28 4
Wheat bagel, 5 in. 1 bagel 98 10
Wheat br ead 1 slice 29 3
Veal steak 3 oz 85 21
Venison r oast 3 oz 85 25
Whey pr otein powder
isolate1 oz 30 20
Yogurt, Gr eek, plain,
low-fat1 cup 245 24
Yogurt, plain, low -fat 1 cup 245 13
Data from U.S. Department of Agricul ture, Agricul tural Resear ch Service, Beltsville Human
Nutrition R esear ch Center . FoodData Centr al. Available f rom https:// fdc.nal.usda .gov/.
Disaccharides  (sucrose , lactose,  and maltose ) are composed
of two simple sugar units joined together . Sucrose (or table sugar),
the most common disaccharide, is a combination of glucose and
fructose. Sucrose occurs naturally in most fruits and is crystal lized
from the syrup of sugar cane and sugar beets to make brown, white,
or powd ered sugar. Lactose (glucose + galactose) is found only in
mammal ian milk. Maltose (glucose + glucose) occurs primari ly when
polysac charides are broken down during digestion. It also occurs in
559
the fermentatio n process of alcohol and is the primary carboh ydrate
in beer .
Polysaccharides , also known as complex carboh ydrates, contain
up to thousands of glucose units. Some of the most common
polysac charides of nutritional importance are starch, fiber, and
glycogen. Starch is the storage form of glucose in plants. Grains,
legumes, and vegetables are good sources of starch. Before starch
can be used as a source of energy, it must be broken down into
glucose compo nents. Dietary fiber, a consti tuent of the plant cell
wall, is also a form of carbo hydrate. Cellulose, hemicel lulose, beta-
glucans, and pectins are fibers; these and noncarboh ydrate fibrous
materials (lignins) are partial ly resistant to human digestiv e
enzymes. Fibers have different physiological effects in the body.
Some delay gastric emptying, which may tempor arily influence
feelings of fullness, while other types of fiber increase bulk and
water content, reducing constipation and decreasing transit time of
feces. In addition, some soluble fibers decrease the absorption of
cholester ol and may therefore help reduce blood cholester ol levels
after ingestion  (104), while prebiotic dietary fibers selectiv ely
stimulate the growth of bacteria in the gut (33, 133). Fiber-rich
foods include beans, peas, bran, many fruits and vegetables, and
some whole-gr ain foods.
Glycogen  is found in small (80, 161) amounts in human liver and
muscle, totaling approximately 15 grams of glycogen per kilogram
body weight (1) and in animal tissue as a tempor ary source of
stored energy (22). While present in animal meats we eat such as
steak, chicken breast, and fish fillets, it is not present to any large
extent. When glucose enters the muscles and liver, if it is not
metabol ized for energy it can be synthesiz ed to form glycogen.
Three-quarters of the glycogen in the body is stored in skeletal
muscle; the remaining quarte r is stored in the liver (22). The process
of con verting glucose to gly cogen is cal led glycogenesis .
Athletes typical ly consume a variety of carboh ydrates in their
normal diets. Howev er, when they want to improve the quality of
560
their diet, by consuming fewer foods that have untow ard effects on
overall health or performance, they may consider macronutrient
ranking systems such as the gly cemic index or gly cemic load.
Glycemic Index and Glycemic Load
The glycemic index (GI) ranks carboh ydrates according to how
quickly they are digested and absorbed, and therefore raise blood
glucose levels, in the 2-hour time period after a meal, compar ed to
the same amount (by weight in grams) of a reference food, typical ly
white bread or glucose, which is giv en a GI of 100 (78).
Glycemic index = Incremental area under the curve for the blood glucose
response after consumption of a 25 or 50g carbohydrate portion of a test food
÷ Incremental area under the curve for the blood glucose response after
consumption of the same portion (in grams) of a standard food × 100      
(10.1)
Low-GI foods are digested and absorbed slowly , resulting in a
smaller rise in blood glucose and subsequent insulin release from the
pancr eas compar ed to the reference food (7, 78). Insulin helps lower
blood glucose levels by facilitating glucose transport into cells. The
fate of glucose within cells depends on where it is shuttled. For
instance, muscle cells use glucose for energy while fat cells convert
glucose into trigly cerides (f at).
Though the GI was develope d to help people better control their
blood sugar levels—something that is particularly helpful for those
with diabetes —resear ch in large cohorts of participants has
suggested that diets with high versus low GI foods are associated
with increased incidence of type 2 diabetes, cardiovascular disease,
diabetes-r elated cancers, and all-cause mortal ity (49, 79). Howev er,
the GI system has a few issues that may limit its accuracy. First,
published GI values for a given type of food may vary consider ably
due to differences in testing and variations in ingredients used;
ripeness of food; and method of food processing, cooking, and
storage (28, 62). Secondly , consuming carboh ydrate as part of a
meal or in different quanti ties affects the GI (7, 8). Low-GI foods
561
gener ally include vegetables, legumes, beans, and whole grains
(table 10.9 ).
TABLE 10.9  Glycemic Index (GI) of Various Foods
Low-GI foods (<55) Medium-GI foods (55-69) High-GI foods (>70)
Apple juice, unsweetened
Banana, ripe
Carrots, raw
Chocolate, mi lk and dark
Corn torti lla
Grapefruit
Ice cream
Kidney beans
Lentils
Milk, soy or dairy
Orange, r aw
Quinoa, cook ed
Tomato juice
Yogurt, f ruitBrown rice, boi led
Carrots, boi led
Couscous
Honey
Muesl i
Pineapple, r aw
Popcorn
Potato, French f ries
Rice v ermicel li
Rolled oats, quick
Soft drink, soda
Spaghet ti, pasta, boi led
Sweet potato , boiled
Tropical blend f ruit drinkCornflak es cer eal
English muf fin
Glucose
Jellybeans
Potato, boiled
Potato, instant mashed
Rice cr ackers, crisps
Rice mi lk
Shredded wheat
Tofu-based f rozen dessert
Watermelon, r aw
White bread
White rice, boi led
Whole wheat br ead
Based on A tkinson et al. (2021).
Since the GI indicates how quickly a carboh ydrate-rich food
affects blood glucose levels, it is hypothesiz ed that eating foods with
different GI values before, during, and after exercise can affect
exercise performance (111). Consumption of a low-GI meal before
exercise can lead to a reduced blood glucose and insulin response,
which has been proposed to help promote fat oxidation and maintain
normal blood glucose levels during exercise (156). Although some
scientists have speculated that consumption of low-GI foods before
exercise might  spare carboh ydrate by minimizing insulin secretion
and therefore improve performance, evidence to support this
hypothesis is inefficient (111). The resear ch is mixed, with some
studies showin g that consumption of a low-GI food as compar ed to a
high-GI food before exercise improves exercise time to exhaustion
(41, 162) and others finding that consuming a preexercise low-GI
food versus a high-GI food had no effect on running and aerobic
562
endur ance exercise performance (29, 155). Therefore, athletes who
use the GI to guide their food choices while balancing health and
performance can maintain an adequate amount of dietary
carboh ydrate with low-GI foods as the base of their choices while
sticking with high-GI foods in and around exercise training to provide
immediate sources of energy (sugar) for activity (25) and to more
rapidly r eplenish gly cogen stor es (86).
The glycemic load (GL) takes the amount of carboh ydrate, in
grams, in a portion of food into account —a factor that also
influences glycemic response. Because GL takes portion size into
account, it is a more realistic gauge of glycemic response than the
GI, which is based on a stand ard serving size. Table 10.10 shows the
difference in GI and GL f or speci fic foods.
The GL is equal to the GI multiplied by the amount of
carboh ydrate in a portion of the f ood and dividing this total b y 100.
Glycemic load = GI of an individual food × grams of carbohydrate per
serving   of food ÷ 100      (10.2)
Foods with a higher GL are expected to lead to greater increases in
blood sugar and subsequent  insulin release (7, 8). A low-GL diet,
combined with exercise, has been shown to improve insulin
sensitivity in older, obese adults and therefore may be a potential
treatment for this population (90), while observ ational and
interv ention studies suggest that low-GI and low-GL diets are
associated with lower levels of inflammatory markers and fasting
insulin (79). Chronic low-grade inflammation is considered a
potential risk factor for chronic diseases (21). In addition, some
(though not all) studies have found that diets with a lower GI or GL
are associated  with lower levels of fasting insulin as well as fewer
cardiovascular risk f actors (67 , 145).
Fiber
Diets low in fiber  have been associated with constipation, heart
disease, colon cancer , and type 2 diabetes. The DRI for fiber ranges
from 21 to 25 grams per day for women (depending on age,
563
pregnancy , and lactation) and 30 to 38 grams per day for men based
on age group. Fiber is comm only found in fruits, vegetables, nuts,
seeds, legume s, and whole-gr ain products such as whole-gr ain
bread, oatmeal, and popcorn.
Health Factors Associated With Food
Sensitivities and Allergies
A food allergy is defined as “an adverse health effect arising from a specific
immune response that occurs reproducibly on exposur e to a given food,” and a
food sensitivity, also known as food intoler ance, is defined as “nonimmune
reactions that include metabol ic, toxic, pharmacologic, and undefined mechanisms”
(17). Reactions to food allergies range in severity from rash to anaph ylaxis, which
is life-threatening (151). The eight most common food allergens in the United
States are cow’s milk, wheat, eggs, tree nuts, peanut, fish, shellfish, and soy (53);
these foods must be identi fied on ingredient labels to prevent adverse reaction in
affected individuals (10). Celiac disease (CD) is a type of food allergy triggering an
immune response to dietary gluten, a protein found in cereals such as wheat, rye,
and barley (97). Food intoler ances, especial ly self-reported, are more prevalent
than food allergies (53); a United States–based survey among adults showed that
the prevalence of self-reported food intoler ances was 25% (77). The most
common food intoler ance is to lactose, affecting nearly 65% of the population
(53). Some food intolerances cannot be readily explained and are classified as
undefined; a well-known example of this is irritable bowel syndr ome (IBS),
characteriz ed by abdominal pain, bloating, abdominal distension, flatulence,
constipation, or diarrhea (151). Dietary management of food sensitivities often
includes elimination diets, where common trigger foods are removed from the diet,
and then slowly reintroduced (151). Individuals with food allergies and intoler ances
should work wi th a r egister ed dieti tian to ensur e nutri tional needs ar e met.
Fat
Although the terms fat and lipid are often used interchangeably ,
lipid is a broader term. Lipids include triglycerides  (fats and oils) as
well as related  fatty compounds, such as sterols and phospholipids.
The lipids of greatest significance in nutrition are triglycerides, fatty
acids , phosphol ipids, and cholester ol. Triglycerides are formed by
the union of glycerol with three fatty acids. The majori ty of lipids
564
found in foods and in the body are in the triglyceride form, and
within this chapter the term fat refers to trigly cerides.
TABLE 10.10  Glycemic Index and Glycemic Load
FoodServing
size (g)Glycemic
index (GI;
glucose =
100)Available
carbohydrates
(g/serving)Glycemic
load (GL; per
serving)
Angel f ood cak e 50 67 ± 5 29 19
Apple (di fferent
varieties)120 38 ± 2 15 6
Apple juice,
unsweetened(250 mL)
8.5 fl oz40 ± 1 29 12
Bagel, whi te, frozen 70 72 35 25
Banana, ripe 120 51 25 13
Blueberry muf fin 60 50 ± 3 31 15
Cheese pizza
(Pillsbury Canada Ltd)100 60 27 16
Chocolate mi lk
(powder dissolv ed in
milk)250 mL
(8.5 fl oz)43 11 5
Chocolate pudding,
instant, made f rom
powder and whole
milk100 47 ± 4 16 7
Corn, sweet 150 53 ± 4 32 17
English muf fin 30 77 ± 7 14 11
Grapes 120 46 ± 3 18 8
Ice cream 50 61 ± 7 13 8
Jellybeans 30 80 ± 8 28 22
Kidney beans, canned 150 52 17 9
Based on A tkinson et al. (2008).
565
FoodServing
size (g)Glycemic
index (GI;
glucose =
100)Available
carbohydrates
(g/serving)Glycemic
load (GL; per
serving)
Mashed potatoes,
instant150 85 ± 3 20 17
Muesl i 30 55 ± 10 19 11
Oatmeal, pr epared 50 69 35 24
Plantain 120 68 ± 6 31 21
Potato chips 50 51 ± 7 24 12
Raisins 60 64 ± 11 44 28
Rice, br own
(steamed, US A)150 50 33 16
Rice, whi te, long
grain, boi led 20-30
min150 50 36 18
Soft drink 250 mL
(8.5 fl oz)63 26 16
Strawberries 120 40 ± 7 3 1
Sweet potato , boiled 150 61 ± 7 28 17
Tomato juice 250 mL
(8.5 fl oz)23 ± 6 7 2
Vanilla wafers 25 77 18 14
Whole wheat br ead 30 72 ± 6 12 8
Yogurt, low -fat
(0.9%), wi ld
strawberry200 31 ± 14 30 9
Based on A tkinson et al. (2008).
Like carboh ydrate, fat contains carbon, oxygen, and hydrogen
atoms, but because the fatty acid chains have more carbon and
hydrogen relative to oxygen, they provide more energy per gram.
For example, fats provide approximately 9 kcal/g, while
566
carboh ydrates and protein provide approximately 4 kcal/g. Dietary
fats and oi ls are composed of di fferent types of f atty acids.
Saturated  fatty acids have no double bonds, and their carbon
molecules are saturated with hydrogen. Saturated fatty acids are
used for certain physiologica l and structur al functions, but the body
can make these fatty acids; therefore, there is no dietary
requirement for saturated fatty acids. Unsatur ated fatty acids contain
some carbon molecules that are joined together by double bonds,
making them more chemical ly reactiv e. Fatty acids containing one
double bond are monounsaturated . With two or more double
bonds, a fatty acid is polyunsaturated . Two polyunsatur ated fatty
acids are consider ed essentia l, meaning that the body cannot make
them: omega-6 and omega-3 fatty acids. These two fatty acids are
necessary for the formation of healthy cell membr anes, proper
development and functioning of the brain and nervous system, and
hormone production. Omega-6 fatty acids are abundant in the food
supply and found in foods such as soybean, corn, and safflower oil
and products made with these oils. Fewer foods contain omega-3
fatty acids; these include fish, particularly fatty fish such as salmon,
herring, halibut, trout, and mackerel, which contain the omega-3
fatty acids eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA)  and docosahexaenoic
acid (DHA) . Eicosapentaenoic acid and DHA are tied to a dose-
dependent decrease in triglycerides; a small, but statistical ly
significant, decrease in blood pressure, especial ly in the elderly; and
potential antiarrh ythmic ef fects (106, 113).
One could also consume flaxseeds, walnuts, soybean oil, or
canola oil to meet omega-3 requirements since these contain the
omega-3 fatty acid alpha-linolenic acid (ALA) , which is
converted to EPA and DHA. Howev er, this conversion process is
inefficient. According to vivo studies, approximately 5% of ALA is
converted to EPA, and <0.5% of ALA is converted to DHA in adults
(129). Therefore, while foods that contain ALA count toward one’s
omega-3 intake, they do not have a substantial effect on EPA and
DHA levels in the body. Foods rich in ALA may improve some risk
567
factors for cardiovascular disease; howev er, it is not clear which is
responsible— ALA, the other compounds in these nutrient -rich foods,
or a combinat ion of the two (43). In addition to its physiological
functions, fat is important because it is responsibl e for the
characteristic flavor, aroma, and textur e of many foods. Gener ally,
most dietary fats and oils are a mix of all three types of fatty acids,
with one type predominating. Soy, corn, sunflower , and safflower oils
are relatively high in polyunsatur ated fatty acids; olive, peanut, and
canola oils are high in monou nsatur ated fatty acids; and most animal
fats and tropical oils (e.g., coconut, palm kernel) are relatively high
in saturated fatty acids. See table 10.11 for fat content of common
foods.
When stored in the human body, fat serves many functions.
Energy is stored primari ly as adipose tissue in humans, but small
amounts are also found in skeletal muscle, especial ly in aerobical ly
trained athletes (142). Body fat insulates and protects organs,
regulates hormones, and carries and stores the fat-soluble vitamins
A, D, E, and K.
Relationship With Cholesterol
Cholesterol  is a waxy, fat-like substa nce that is an important
structur al and functional component of all cell membr anes.
Additional ly, cholester ol is used for the production of bile salts,
vitamin D, and several hormones, including the sex hormones
(estrogen, androgen, and progester one) as well as cortisol. Though
cholester ol has many essential functions in the body, high levels of
cholester ol may lead to atheroscler osis, hardening of the arteries
due to plaque buildup on artery walls, which narrows the area within
arteries through which blood can pass. Therefore, having high levels
of blood cholester ol is a risk f actor f or heart disease and str oke.
High levels of total cholester ol, low-density lipoproteins
(LDL) , and triglycerides are all associated with increased risk of
heart disease. Low-densi ty lipoprotein is further divided into
subfractions based on particle size. Smaller, more dense particles,
568
called very low-density lipoproteins (VLDL) , are more
atherogenic (artery clogging) than larger LDL particles (50). High
levels of saturated or trans fats, weight gain, and anorexia can all
increase LDL cholester ol (159). Howev er, VLDL levels increase with
increasing intake of carboh ydrate (116). High levels of high-
density lipop roteins (HDL ) are protectiv e against heart disease
but are not a target of therapy (practitioners are told not to focus on
HDL). Table 10.12  shows how LDL, total, and HDL cholester ol are
classified.
High intake of refined carboh ydrates, weight gain, excessiv e
alcohol intake, and very-low-fat diets can increase triglycerides
(blood fats). Howev er, as with cholester ol, several factors affect
triglycerides, including a sedentary lifestyle, overweight or obesity,
smoking, genetics, and certain diseases and medications (126, 159).
For optimal cardiovascular health, and risk reduction of chronic
diseases, the Scientific Report of the 2020 Dietary Guidel ines
Advisory Commi ttee recommends limiting saturated fat to less than
10% of total calories and replacing saturated fat with unsatur ated
fat, particularly polyunsatur ated fat. As of June 2018, partial ly
hydrogenated oils (PHOs), the major source of artificial trans fat in
the food supply , and a major cause of dyslipidemia, are no longer
Gener ally Recogniz ed as Safe (GRAS). Therefore, PHOs are no
longer added to foods. In addition, it is advised that added sugars,
particularly from sugar -sweetened beverages, desser ts, sweet
snacks, candies, and sweetened breakfast cereals, are consumed at
a maximum of 10% of total calories (154).
Fat and Performance
Both intramuscular and circulating fatty acids are potential energy
sources during exercise. Compar ed with the limited capacity of the
body to store carboh ydrate, fat stores are large and represent a vast
source of fuel for exercise (20). For example, a lean runner who is
160 pounds (72 kg) with 4% body fat has approximately 22,400
calories stored within fat tissue (57). At rest and during low-intensi ty
569
exercise, a high percentage of the energy produced is derived from
fatty acid oxidation (137). When the intensi ty of exercise increases,
there is a gradual shift from fat to carboh ydrate as the preferred
source of fuel. Consistent aerobic training increases the muscle’ s
capaci ty to use fatty acids (82). In addition to training , the body
adapts to using greater amounts of fat for energy when a higher -fat,
lower -carboh ydrate diet is consumed over a period of time (60, 82).
Because the type of diet to which the body is adapted may influence
performance (69), the effects of high-f at, low-carboh ydrate diets
vary, depending on the individual (128, 136, 138).
TABLE 10.11  Fat Content of Common Foods
FoodServing
sizeServing
size (g)Total
fat
(g)Saturated
fat (g)Mono-
unsaturated
fat (g)Poly-
unsaturated
fat (g)
Almond but ter 1 tbsp 32 17.7 1.3 10.4 4.3
Almonds,
whole22 each 26 13.1 1.0 8.3 3.3
Avocado 1/4 each 50 7.3 1.1 4.9 0.9
Beef, ground,
80% lean, pan
browned3 oz 85 14.8 5.6 6.5 0.4
Beef, sirloin
steak3 oz 85 13.4 5.3 5.6 0.5
Butter, dairy 1 tbsp 14 11.5 7.3 3.0 0.4
Cashews,
whole, dry
roasted1/4 cup 34 15.9 3.1 9.4 2.7
Cheese,
cheddar , low-
fat1 slice 28 2.0 1.2 0.6 0.1
Data from U.S. Department of Agricul ture, Agricul tural
Resear ch Service, Beltsville Human Nutrition Resear ch
Center . FoodData Centr al. Available from https:// fdc.nal
.usda .gov/.
570
FoodServing
sizeServing
size (g)Total
fat
(g)Saturated
fat (g)Mono-
unsaturated
fat (g)Poly-
unsaturated
fat (g)
Cheese,
mozzar ella,
part-skim,
shredded1/4 cup 28 5.6 3.2 1.6 0.3
Chia seeds 1/4 cup 42 12.9 1.4 1.0 9.9
Chicken, thigh
with skin3 oz 85 12.5 3.5 5.3 2.5
Coconut oi l 1 tbsp 14 13.4 11.2 0.9 0.2
Dark chocolate 1 oz 28 9.1 5.4 2.8 0.3
Egg, lar ge 1 50 5.3 1.6 2.0 0.7
Flaxseed,
ground1 tbsp 7 3.0 0.3 0.5 2.0
Goat cheese,
soft1 oz 28 6.0 4.1 1.4 0.2
Margarine,
vegetable oi l
spread 40%1 tbsp 14 5.4 1.3 1.7 2.2
Mayonnaise,
regular1 tbsp 14 10.3 1.6 2.3 6.2
Milk, skim 1 cup 244 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.0
Milk, whole,
3.25% f at1 cup 244 7.9 4.6 2.0 0.5
Oil, canola 1 tbsp 14 14.0 1.0 8.9 3.9
Oil, olive 1 tbsp 14 14.0 1.9 9.9 1.4
Oil, safflower ,
70% l inoleic1 tbsp 14 14.0 0.8 1.9 10.1
Oil, soybean 1 tbsp 14 14.0 2.1 3.1 7.9
Data from U.S. Department of Agricul ture, Agricul tural
Resear ch Service, Beltsville Human Nutrition Resear ch
Center . FoodData Centr al. Available from https:// fdc.nal
.usda .gov/.
571
FoodServing
sizeServing
size (g)Total
fat
(g)Saturated
fat (g)Mono-
unsaturated
fat (g)Poly-
unsaturated
fat (g)
Peanut but ter,
natural2 tbsp 32 16.5 3.3 8.3 4.1
Salmon, fi let,
wild, bak ed3 oz 85 6.9 1.1 2.3 2.8
Tuna, l ight,
canned in
water2 oz 56 0.5 0.1 0.1 0.1
Trout, fi let,
wild, bak ed3 oz 85 5.0 1.4 1.5 1.6
Walnuts,
dried, halv es1/4 cup 25 16.3 1.5 2.2 11.8
Yogurt, Gr eek,
plain, low -fat1 cup 245 4.7 3.0 1.2 0.2
Yogurt, plain,
low-fat1 cup 245 3.8 2.5 1.0 0.1
Data from U.S. Department of Agricul ture, Agricul tural
Resear ch Service, Beltsville Human Nutrition Resear ch
Center . FoodData Centr al. Available from https:// fdc.nal
.usda .gov/.
TABLE 10.12  Classification of LDL, Total, and HDL
Cholesterol
LDL cholesterol (mg/dl)
<100 Optimal
100-129 Near optimal/abo ve optimal
LDL = low -densi ty lipoprotein; HDL = high-densi ty lipoprotein.
Lipopr otein lev el testing should be completed after a 9- to 12-hour f ast.
LDL cholester ol is the primary tar get of ther apy.
Source: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute; National Institutes of Health; U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services,  Managing Blood Cholester ol in Adults:
Systematic Evidence Review from the Cholester ol Expert Panel, 2013 (U.S. Department of
Health and Human S ervices; National Heart, Lung, and B lood I nstitute, 2013).
572
LDL cholesterol (mg/dl)
130-159 Borderline high
160-189 High
>190 Very high
Total cholesterol (mg/dl)
<200 Desirable
200-239 Borderline high
>240 High
HDL cholesterol (mg/dl)
<40 Low
>60 High
LDL = low -densi ty lipoprotein; HDL = high-densi ty lipoprotein.
Lipopr otein lev el testing should be completed after a 9- to 12-hour f ast.
LDL cholester ol is the primary tar get of ther apy.
Source: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute; National Institutes of Health; U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services,  Managing Blood Cholester ol in Adults:
Systematic Evidence Review from the Cholester ol Expert Panel, 2013 (U.S. Department of
Health and Human S ervices; National Heart, Lung, and B lood I nstitute, 2013).
The human body has a sufficient amount of fat to fuel
long training sessions or competition.
Macronutrient Guidelines
Protein
Choose a variety of protein foods, from both animal and plant sources, which
include seafood, lean meat and poultry, eggs, beans, peas and lentils, soy
products, nuts, and seeds.
Increase the amount and variety of seafood consumed by choosing seafood
in place of some meat and poul try.
Choose nuts, seeds, and so y products in place of some meat and poul try.
Aerobic endur ance athletes should consume 1.2 to 2.0 grams of protein per
kilogram body weight per da y.
573
Strength athletes should consume 1.4 to 2.0 grams of protein per kilogram
body weight per da y.
Ingest 20 to 40 grams (0.25-0.40 g of protein per kg of body mass) of high-
quality protein ev ery 3 to 4 hours thr oughout the da y.
Carbohydrate
Reduce intak e of calories f rom added sugars.
Increase intake of vegetables (prepared without added salt or fat) and fruit
(prepared wi thout added sugars).
Eat a variety of vegetables, including beans; peas; starchy; and dark-green,
red, and or ange v egetables.
Consume at least half of all total grains as whole grains. Individuals who eat
refined gr ains should choose enriched gr ains.
Fats and Alcohol
Consume less than 10% of calories from saturated fats by replacing them
with unsatur ated f ats, particularly polyunsatur ated f ats.
If alcohol  is consumed, it should be consumed in moder ation—up to one
drink per day for women and two drinks per day for men— and only by adults
of legal drinking age. Pregnant women should avoid alcohol, and
breastfeeding women should be cautious about their intake if they choose to
drink and speak to their healthcare provider. Alcohol should be avoided in the
time period after ex ercise because i t reduces muscle pr otein synthesis (124).
574
Vitamins
Vitamins  are organic substances (i.e., containing carbon atoms )
needed in very small amounts to perform specific metabol ic
functions (71, 166). Vitamins typical ly act as coenzymes, facilitating
numer ous reactions in the body. For instance, B vitamins help the
body make energy from the metabol ism of carboh ydrates. Table
10.13  describ es the functions and some food sources of individual
vitamins.
TABLE 10.13  Vitamins
Vitamin FunctionFood sources
(Oregon State
University)DRI and ULb per
day
Vitamin A Necessary f or vision,
healthy skin, teeth,
body tissues, and
healthy mucous
membr anes and skinAnimal f oods including
animal l iver (veal, beef ,
goose, lamb , turk ey),
meat, f ortified mi lk,
cheese, herringMales: 300-900 mcg
RAE (r etinal activi ty
equiv alents) (RDA)
Females: 300-1,300
mcg RAE (RDA)
Males: 600-3,000
mcg RAE (UL)
Females: 600-3,000
mcg RAE (UL)
Beta car otene An antio xidanta;
converted into vi tamin
A in the bodySweet potato , carrots,
pumpkin, spinach,
collards, kale, winter
squash, lamb quarters,
beet gr eens, turnip
greens, cabbageNo RDA or AI;
howev er, 1 IU beta
carotene f rom food =
0.05 mcg RAE
vitamin A
UL is not
determinable due to
lack of data.
Supplementation is
advised only f or
individuals at risk f or
vitamin A deficiency .
Vitamin D Aids calcium
absorption, helps
maintain blood lev els
of calcium andFish (swor dfish, salmon,
tuna, sar dines,
mackerel, carp , eel,
whitefish), f ortified mi lk,Males: 15-20 mcg
(600-800 IU) (RDA)
Females: 15-20 mcg
(600-800 IU) (RDA)
575
Vitamin FunctionFood sources
(Oregon State
University)DRI and ULb per
day
phosphorus; necessary
for bui lding bone mass
and pr eventing bone
lossfortified br eakfast
cereals, egg y olksMales: 63-100 mcg
(2,500-4 ,000 IU)
(UL)
Females: 63-100 mcg
(2,500-4 ,000 IU)
(UL)
Vitamin E An antio xidanta;
needed f or immune
functioning and
metabol ismOils (wheat germ,
vegetable), f ortified
breakfast cer eals, nuts
and seeds, wheat germ,
peanut but ter, corn oi lMales: 6-15 mg (7 .5-
22.4 IU) (RDA)
Females: 6-19 mg
(9-28.4 IU) (RDA)
Males: 200-1,000 mg
(300-1,500 IU) (UL)
Females: 200-1,000
mg (300-1,500 IU)
(UL)
Vitamin K
(phylloquinone)Needed f or blood
clotting; supports
tissue and bone heal thDark gr een leaf y
vegetables (kale,
Brussels spr outs,
spinach, char d, turnip
and mustar d greens,
beet gr eens, r adicchio),
broccoli, aspar agus,
lamb quartersMales: 30-120 mcg
(AI)
Females: 30-90 mcg
(AI)
No UL due to lack of
data
Vitamin C Promotes heal thy cell
development, wound
healing, and r esistance
to infections. S erves as
an antio xidanta;
necessary f or
conversion of the
inactiv e form of f olic
acid to the activ e form;
makes iron available
for hemoglobin
synthesis.Sweet peppers,
peaches, gua va,
broccoli, kiwi fruit, citrus
fruit (strawberries,
oranges, l imes, lemons,
grapefruit, tangerine),
papayas, cantaloupe,
tomatoes, potatoes,
onionsMales: 15-90 mg
(RDA)
Females: 15-120 mg
(RDA)
Males: 400-2,000 mg
(UL)
Females: 400-2,000
mg (UL)
Thiamin (B 1) Coenzyme f or
carboh ydrate
metabol ism; needed
for normal f unctioningFortified br eakfast
cereals, sunflower
seeds, peas, pork,
oranges, or ange juice,Males: 0.5-1.2 mg
(RDA)
Females: 0.5-1.4 mg
(RDA)
576
Vitamin FunctionFood sources
(Oregon State
University)DRI and ULb per
day
of the nerv ous system
and muscles, including
the heartlima beans, pecans,
enriched riceNo UL due to lack of
data
Ribofla vin (B 2)Coenzyme in r ed blood
cell formation; nerv ous
system f unctioning;
and metabol ism of
carboh ydrate, pr otein,
and fat; needed f or
vision and ma y help
protect against
cataractsLiver, wheat germ,
brewer’s yeast,
almonds, cheese,
fortified br eakfast
cereal, whey pr otein,
milk, eggs, lamb , pork,
veal, beef , broccoli,
yogurtMales: 0.5-1.3 mg
(RDA)
Females: 0.5-1.6 mg
(RDA)
No UL due to lack of
data
Niacin Coenzyme f or
carboh ydrate, pr otein,
and fat metabol ism and
proper nerv ous system
functioning; high
intakes can lower
elevated cholester olSoy protein, so y flour ,
textur ed vegetable
protein, whey pr otein,
beef, peanuts, peanut
butter, sunflower seeds,
fortified br eakfast
cerealsMales: 6-16 mg
(RDA)
Females: 6-18 mg
(RDA)
Males: 10-35 mg
(UL)
Females: 10-35 mg
(UL)
Pyrido xine (B 6)Coenzyme f or protein
metabol ism and
nervous and immune
system f unction;
involved in synthesis of
hormones and r ed
blood cel lsLiver, bananas, f ortified
breakfast cer eals,
soybeans, chick en,
tuna, r aw carr ots, beef ,
broccoli, spinach,
potatoes, al falfa
sprouts, na vy beans,
peanut but ter, garbanz o
beans, w alnuts,
sunflower seeds,
avocados, eggs, l ima
beans, cabbage, salmonMales: 0.5-1. 7 mg
(RDA)
Females: 0.5-2.0 mg
(RDA)
Males: 30-100 mg
(UL)
Females: 30-100 mg
(UL)
Folate Needed f or normal
growth and
development and r ed
blood cel l formation;
reduces risk of neur al
tube birth def ects; ma y
reduce risk of heartBrewer’s yeast, f ortified
breakfast cer eals, l iver,
black-eyed peas, beans
(pinto , black, l ima,
white, garbanz o, soy),
peanuts, peanut but ter,
spinach, turnip gr eens,Males: 150-400 mcg
(RDA)
Females: 150-600
mcg (RDA)
Males: 300-1,000
mcg (UL)
577
Vitamin FunctionFood sources
(Oregon State
University)DRI and ULb per
day
disease and cervical
dysplasiaaspar agus, mustar d
greens, sea weed, eggs,
enriched br ead,
oranges, or ange juiceFemales: 300-1,000
mcg (UL)
Cobalamin
(B12)Vital for blood
formation and heal thy
nervous systemLiver, oysters, lamb ,
eggs, beef , shel lfish,
fish, poul try, pork,
chicken, fortified
breakfast cer ealsMales: 0.9-2.4 mcg
(RDA)
Females: 0.9-2.8
mcg (RDA)
No UL due to lack of
data
Biotin Assists in the
metabol ism of f atty
acids and use of B
vitaminsNuts (peanuts,
hazelnuts, almonds,
cashews, macadamia),
soybeans, peanut
butter, black -eyed peas,
liver, milk, egg y olks,
yeast, cheese,
cauliflower , carrots,
avocados, sweet
potatoesMales: 8-30 mcg (AI)
Females: 8-35 mcg
(AI)
No UL due to lack of
data
Pantothenic
acidAids in normal gr owth
and dev elopmentLiver, sunflower seeds,
fortified br eakfast
cereals, egg y olks,
whey pr otein, so y
protein, peanuts,
peanut but ter, pecans,
veal, enriched rice,
broccoli, lima beansMales: 2-5 mg (AI)
Females: 2-7 mg (AI)
No UL due to lack of
data
578
Vitamin FunctionFood sources
(Oregon State
University)DRI and ULb per
day
aAntioxidants are substances that modify cell-signal ing pathways and counter act oxidativ e
stress-induced cell damage caused by reactiv e oxygen and nitrogen species (free radicals).
Free radicals are both beneficial and harmf ul to human health. An overproduction of, or
overexposur e to, free radicals combin ed with a deficiency in antioxidants can result in
oxidativ e stress and subsequent damage to cel lular l ipids, pr oteins, and DNA (71, 166).
bDietary Reference Intake (DRI): A set of nutrient recommendations that include the values
Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA), Adequate Intake (AI), Estimated Average
Requirement (EAR) , and the Tolerable Upper Level Intake (UL). Tolerable Upper Level
Intake (UL): The highest daily intake of a nutrient that is likely to not pose a risk of
adverse health effects in most of the gener al population. DRIs and UL are listed as a range
across the l ife span f or each sex. DRI and UL v alues f rom (71-74).
Data f rom National I nstitutes of Heal th.
Water-soluble vitamins, including the B vitamins and vitamin C,
dissolv e in water and are transported in the blood. With the
exception of vitamin B12, which is stored in the liver for years, water-
soluble vitamins are not stored in appreciable amounts in the body;
instead the body uses what is needed and then excretes the
remaining amounts in urine (165). Though there are no known side
effects from excess vitamin B12 consumption, consuming more than
the body can use will not increase energy or improve health (18,
74). Vitamins A, D, E, and K are fat soluble and therefore carried by
fat in the blood and stored in fat tissue in the body (109). Excess
preformed vitamin A (not beta carotene, alpha carotene, or beta
crypto xanthin, which are converted into vitamin A in the body) is
toxic and associated with significant adverse effects including liver
damage, intracranial pressure (pseudotumor cerebri), dizziness,
nausea, headaches, skin irritation, pain in joints and bones, coma,
and even death (23). Excess vitamin A intake can occur through diet
but typical ly results from high levels of vitamin A in supplements (72,
109). Toxic levels of vitamin  D can lead to heart arrhythmias and
increased levels of blood calcium, which can cause blood vessel and
tissue calcification, as well as damage to the heart, blood vessels,
and kidneys (109). Vitamin E acts as an anticoagulant and therefore
579
thins the blood. Regular intake of excessiv e amounts of vitamin E
can lead to high serum vitamin E levels, which is associated with
increased risk of hemorrhagic stroke, particularly in individuals on
blood thinners  (125). Because vitamin K helps blood clot, excess
intake of this vitamin can interfere with the effects of some
anticlot ting medications such as w arfarin (Coumadin) (94).
Vitamin D is a particular vitamin of interest for both sedentary and
athletic individuals because it is important for immuni ty, protein
synthesis, muscle function, cardiovascular function, inflammatory
response, cell growth, and regulation of muscle and bone (39, 121).
Many people, including athletes, struggle to meet the
recommendations for vitamin D due to few foods being rich sources
of this vitamin (51). According to the Scientific Report of the 2020
Dietary Guidel ines Advisory Commi ttee, more than 90 percent of
men and women over 19 years of age do not consume enough
vitamin D (56, 154). Eating a diet containing seafood, and choosing
foods that are fortified with vitamin D, including milk, fortified soy
beverages, fortified soy yogurt, and some whole-gr ain cereals, can
help adults meet their needs for vitamin D. In addition to dietary
sources, the body can make vitamin D from the sun through sun
exposur e on the skin; howev er, populations living at higher latitudes
or who spend a lot of time indoors do not have enough sun
exposur e to meet vitamin D needs (51). As such, vitamin D
supplementation may be necessary for many individuals to prevent
deficiency . A meta- analysis of 11 randomiz ed control trials and 436
athletes showed that vitamin D supplementation only had a small or
trivial effect on upper and lower body muscular strength or power
(150). Despi te lack of a notable performance effect, adequate
vitamin D levels may be important for athletes to protect against
stress fractures and acute i llness (35, 39, 91).
580
Minerals
Minerals  contribute to the structur e of bone, teeth, and nails; are a
component of enzymes; and perform a wide variety of metabol ic
functions. For example, calcium is needed for bone and tooth
formation and function, nerve transmission, and muscle contraction.
Iron is necessary for oxygen transport and is also a component of
enzymes necessary for energy metabol ism. Calcium; phosphorus;
magnesium; iron; and the electrolytes  sodium, potassium, and
chloride are often called the major miner als. For the athlete,
miner als are important for bone health, oxygen-carryin g capaci ty,
and fluid and electr olyte balance. The miner als, their functions, and
good f ood sour ces ar e listed in table 10.14 .
TABLE 10.14  Minerals
Mineral Function Food sourcesDRI and
UL* per
day
Calcium Essential f or dev eloping and
maintaining heal thy bones
and teeth; assists wi th blood
clotting, muscle contr action,
and nerv e transmissionFruit juices and f ruit drinks
fortified wi th calcium, cheese,
sardines, mi lk, cot tage cheese,
yogurt, ice cr eam, calcium-set
tofu, turnip gr eens, Chinese
cabbage, mustar d greens, kale,
rutabagaMales:
700-1,300
mg (RDA)
Females:
700-1,300
mg (RDA)
Males:
2,000-
3,000 mg
(UL)
Females:
2,000-
*Dietary Reference Intake (DRI): A set of nutrient recommendations that include the
values Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA), Adequate Intake (AI), Estimated Average
Requirement (EAR) , and the Tolerable Upper Level Intake (UL). Tolerable Upper Level
Intake (UL): The highest daily intake of a nutrient that is likely to not pose a risk of
adverse health effects in most of the gener al population. DRIs and UL are listed as a range
across the l ife span f or each sex. DRI and UL v alues f rom (72, 73).
Data f rom National I nstitutes of Heal th.
581
Mineral Function Food sourcesDRI and
UL* per
day
3,000 mg
(UL)
Phosphorus Works wi th calcium to
develop and maintain str ong
bones and teeth; enhances
use of other nutrients;
essential f or ener gy
metabol ism, DNA structur e,
and cel l membr anesCheese, fish, beef , pork,
whole- wheat pr oducts, cocoa
powder , pumpkin seeds,
sunflower seeds, almondsMales:
460-1,250
mg (RDA)
Females:
460-1,250
mg (RDA)
Males: 3-4
g (UL)
Females:
3-4 g (UL)
Magnesium Activates nearly 100 enzymes
and helps nerv es and
muscles f unction; consti tuent
of bones and teethBran (wheat and rice), cocoa
powder , fortified br eakfast
cereals, seeds (pumpkin,
sunflower), so ybeans, nuts
(almonds, pine nuts, haz elnuts,
cashews, w alnuts, peanuts),
spinachMales: 80-
420 mg
(RDA)
Females:
80-400 mg
(RDA)
Males: 65-
350 mg
(UL)
Females:
65-350 mg
(UL)
Molybdenum Needed f or metabol ism of
DNA and ribonucleic acid
(RNA) and pr oduction of uric
acidMilk, mi lk products, peas,
beans, l iver, whole-gr ain
productsMales: 17-
45 mcg
(RDA)
Females:
17-50 mcg
(RDA)
Males:
300-2,000
*Dietary Reference Intake (DRI): A set of nutrient recommendations that include the
values Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA), Adequate Intake (AI), Estimated Average
Requirement (EAR) , and the Tolerable Upper Level Intake (UL). Tolerable Upper Level
Intake (UL): The highest daily intake of a nutrient that is likely to not pose a risk of
adverse health effects in most of the gener al population. DRIs and UL are listed as a range
across the l ife span f or each sex. DRI and UL v alues f rom (72, 73).
Data f rom National I nstitutes of Heal th.
582
Mineral Function Food sourcesDRI and
UL* per
day
mcg (UL)
Females:
300-2,000
mcg (UL)
Manganese Necessary f or the normal
development of the sk eletal
and connectiv e tissues;
involved in metabol ism of
carboh ydratesWheat germ, wheat br an, rice
bran, fortified br eakfast
cereals, rice cak es, nuts
(peanuts, pecans, pine nuts,
walnuts, almonds, haz elnuts),
soybeans, mussels, whole-
wheat pr oducts (pastas,
breads, and cr ackers)Males: 1.2-
2.3 mg
(AI)
Females:
1.2-2.6 mg
(AI)
Males: 2-
11 mg (UL)
Females:
2-11 mg
(UL)
Copper Involved in ir on metabol ism,
nervous system f unctioning,
bone heal th, and synthesis of
proteins; pla ys a r ole in the
pigmentation of skin, hair ,
and ey esLiver, shel lfish (especial ly
oysters), lobster , nuts
(cashews, B razil nuts,
hazelnuts, w alnuts, peanuts,
almonds, pecans, pistachios),
seeds (sunflower , pumpkin),
fortified br eakfast cer eals,
great northern beansMales:
340-900
mcg (RDA)
Females:
340-1,300
mcg (RDA)
Males:
1,000-
10,000
mcg (UL)
Females:
1,000-
10,000
mcg (UL)
*Dietary Reference Intake (DRI): A set of nutrient recommendations that include the
values Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA), Adequate Intake (AI), Estimated Average
Requirement (EAR) , and the Tolerable Upper Level Intake (UL). Tolerable Upper Level
Intake (UL): The highest daily intake of a nutrient that is likely to not pose a risk of
adverse health effects in most of the gener al population. DRIs and UL are listed as a range
across the l ife span f or each sex. DRI and UL v alues f rom (72, 73).
Data f rom National I nstitutes of Heal th.
583
Mineral Function Food sourcesDRI and
UL* per
day
Chromium Aids in glucose metabol ism
and ma y help r egulate blood
sugar and insul in lev els in
people wi th diabetesMushr ooms (whi te), raw
oysters, wine, apples, br ewer’s
yeast, beer , pork, chick enMales: 11-
35 mcg
(AI)
Females:
11-45 mcg
(AI)
No UL due
to lack of
data
Iodine Part of the th yroid hormone;
helps r egulate gr owth,
development, and ener gy
metabol ismIodized sal t, saltwater fish and
seafoodMales: 90-
150 mcg
(RDA)
Females:
90-290
mcg (RDA)
Males:
200-1,100
mcg (UL)
Females:
200-1,100
mcg (UL)
Iron Necessary f or red blood cel l
formation and f unction;
consti tuent of m yoglobin and
component of enzyme
systemsLiver, beef , lamb , pork, v eal,
poultry, clams, o ysters, f ortified
breakfast cer eals, enriched
bread pr oducts, br ewer’s yeast,
nuts (pine nuts, cashews,
almonds), beans (kidney ,
green, garbanz o)Males: 7-
11 mg
(RDA)
Females:
7-27 mg
(RDA)
Males: 40-
45 mg (UL)
Females:
40-45 mg
(UL)
*Dietary Reference Intake (DRI): A set of nutrient recommendations that include the
values Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA), Adequate Intake (AI), Estimated Average
Requirement (EAR) , and the Tolerable Upper Level Intake (UL). Tolerable Upper Level
Intake (UL): The highest daily intake of a nutrient that is likely to not pose a risk of
adverse health effects in most of the gener al population. DRIs and UL are listed as a range
across the l ife span f or each sex. DRI and UL v alues f rom (72, 73).
Data f rom National I nstitutes of Heal th.
584
Mineral Function Food sourcesDRI and
UL* per
day
Selenium Essential component of a k ey
antioxidant enzyme;
necessary f or normal gr owth
and dev elopment and f or use
of iodine in th yroid functionTenderloin of beef , pollock,
trout, tuna, o ysters, mack erel,
flounder , liver, sunflower seeds,
wheat br an, wheat germ, some
pork, f ortified br eakfast
cereals, per ch, cr ab, clams,
cod, haddock, whole- wheat
breadsMales: 20-
55 mcg
(RDA)
Females:
20-70 mcg
(RDA)
Males: 90-
400 mcg
(UL)
Females:
90-400
mcg (UL)
Zinc Essential part of mor e than
100 enzymes in volved in
digestion, metabol ism,
reproduction, and wound
healingOysters, beef , veal, lamb , pork,
chicken, lima beans, black -
eyed peas, whi te beansMales: 3-
11 mg
(RDA)
Females:
3-13 mg
(RDA)
Males: 7-
40 mg (UL)
Females:
7-40 mg
(UL)
*Dietary Reference Intake (DRI): A set of nutrient recommendations that include the
values Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA), Adequate Intake (AI), Estimated Average
Requirement (EAR) , and the Tolerable Upper Level Intake (UL). Tolerable Upper Level
Intake (UL): The highest daily intake of a nutrient that is likely to not pose a risk of
adverse health effects in most of the gener al population. DRIs and UL are listed as a range
across the l ife span f or each sex. DRI and UL v alues f rom (72, 73).
Data f rom National I nstitutes of Heal th.
Two miner als, iron and calcium, deserv e additional attention.
Athletes who do not consum e enough dietary iron can develop iron
deficiency or iron deficiency anemia , both of which can impair
performance. Inadequate dietary calcium can contribute to low bone
density and possibly future risk of developing osteopenia or
osteopor osis.
585
Iron
Iron is essential for both the functioning and synthesis of
hemoglobin, a protein that transfers oxygen throughout the body
(158). In addition, iron is a component of the protein myoglobin,
which transports oxygen to muscles (63). This miner al plays
important roles in growth, development, cell functioning, and the
synthesis and f unctioning of some hormones (30, 160).
Iron deficiency and iron deficiency anemia is a major public health
concern worldwide, mainly affecting women and children (40).
Though it disproportionately affects those in developing countries, it
is common in industrial ized countries as well. The National Health
and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) from 2015-16 found
that approximately 11% of American females aged 12 to 49 had iron
deficiency , with the goal to reduce that level to 7.2% (99). (In
studies examin ing iron deficiency in female athletes, more than 25%
tested positive for iron deficiency [65, 102].) Iron deficiency occurs
in three stages (in order of severity): depletion, marginal deficiency ,
and anemia (90, 117). Iron carries oxygen to the working muscles,
and even marginal iron deficiency may impair athletic performance
(19, 63). Iron deficiency anemia develops when low iron stores
persist for a period of time and the body cannot make enough
healthy red blood cells to deliver oxygen throughout the body (158).
Symptoms depend on the individual; some people are asymptomatic
or get used to their symptoms and assume that they are normal.
Symptoms of iron deficiency  or iron deficiency anemia may include
weakness, fatigue, irritability, poor concentr ation, headache,
decreased exercise capaci ty, hair loss, and dry mouth (15). Other
symptoms associated with iron deficiency anemia include feeling cold
often, inflamed tongue (glossi tis), shortness of breath during routine
activities, and pica (the desire to eat nonfood substances such as
laundry starch, dirt, clay, and ice) (52). Iron deficiency has also been
shown to negativ ely affect mental health and contribute to
depression (30, 99).
586
Women of childbearing age, teenage girls, pregnant women,
infants, and toddlers have the greatest need for iron and therefore
an increased risk of becoming deficient. In addition, distance
runners, vegetarian athletes, female athletes, those who lose a
significant amount of blood during their menstrual cycle, people who
take excessiv e amounts of antacids, and people with certain
digestiv e diseases such as celiac disease have an increased risk of
developing ir on deficiency anemia (72).
The two types of iron found in food are heme and nonhe me iron.
Heme iron, derived from hemoglobin, is found in foods that original ly
contained hemoglobin and myoglobin— animal foods including red
meats, fish, and poultry. Heme iron is absorbed better than
nonheme iron, and absorption is not affected by anything else we
eat. Approximately 15% to 35% of the heme iron consumed is
actual ly absorbed (112).
Nonheme iron is the form of iron found in all other, non-meat
foods including vegetables, grains, and iron-fortified breakfast
cereal. Only 2% to 20% of nonheme iron is absorbed (160). While
heme iron is not affected by compounds found in food eaten
concurr ently, many factors affect the absorption of nonheme iron.
For instance, the nonheme iron in spinach is bound to a substance
called phytic acid, the storage form of phosphorus in plants. Phytic
acid decreases  the absorption of nonheme iron. In addition, several
other substances may decrease the absorption of nonheme iron,
including tannins (found in tea and wine), calcium (found in dairy
and multivitamins), polyphenols, phytates (found in legumes and
whole grains),  and some of the proteins in soy. A person can
increase the amount of nonheme iron absorbed by consuming
vitamin C–rich foods or beverages at the same time or consuming a
nonheme source at the same time heme iron is consumed. For
example, pairing spinach with meat increases iron absorption from
spinach (72, 160).
There are many supplemental forms of iron; each supplies a
different amount of elemental iron while also varying in
587
bioavailability and the potential for side effects such as stomach
upset (103, 157). Ferrous iron has a high bioavailability and is most
recommended; it is often paired with vitamin C, which enhances iron
absorption (157). It is recommended to take iron supplements on an
empty stomach, at least an hour before meals, because many foods,
drinks, and other dietary supplements can interfere with iron
absorption. For example, whole grains, coffee, black tea, red wine,
and hot chocolate can impair iron absorption. Additional ly, both
calcium and supplemental magnesium may interfere with iron
absorption (169). Because of the many factors affecting iron intake
and absorption, including intake of other miner als the athlete may
not be consum ing in adequate quanti ties, only a medical doctor or
register ed dietitian should recommend iron supplements and how to
take an iron supplement for maximum absorption and minimal
stomach upset (157).
Calcium
Adequate calcium intake throughout childhood and adolescence is
essential for the development of strong bones. Calcium  helps bones
grow in length and density during adolescence, with up to 90% of
peak bone miner al density occurring during late adolescence (61). In
adults, calcium helps maintain bone density. When dietary calcium
intake falls short, calcium is pulled from its storage site in bone to
meet the demands of the body and keep calcium concentr ations in
the blood, muscle, and intercellular fluids constant. Calcium is
essential for attaining peak bone mass, and calcium deficiencies can
impair the attainment of peak bone miner al density and increase risk
of fracture later in life (109). Calcium also keeps teeth strong, helps
regulate muscle contraction, and plays a role in nerve functioning,
blood vessel expansion and contraction, and hormone and enzyme
secretion (109).
The NHANES found that just 15% of 9- to 13-year-old females
and less than 10% of females aged 14 to 18 and over the age of 51
met the adequate intake (AI) for calcium from diet alone (11).
588
Therefore, athletes should be encour aged to include dairy products
and other calcium-rich foods in their diets. The athlete’ s medical
doctor or register ed dietitian may suggest a calcium supplement if
calcium needs cannot be met thr ough diet alone.
Caloric Versus Nutrient-Dense Foods
Given the rise in obesity in America, some classify the American diet as calorie
dense but nutrient poor. The Scientific Report of the 2020 Dietary Guidel ines
Advisory Commi ttee recommends a dietary pattern including a variety of nutrient -
dense foods. Though there is no standar dized defini tion of the term nutrient
density , in gener al, choosin g nutrient -dense foods means looking for foods based
on the nutrients such as vitamins, minerals, and fiber, as well as the healthy plant-
based compounds that they provide, whereas caloric density refers to the caloric
content of a food. Foods high in nutrie nt density include milk, vegetables, protein
foods, and grains, while foods high in caloric density but low in nutrient density
typical ly include potato chips, desserts, and candy (44). For more information on
nutrient versus caloric density, the reader is referred to the work of Drewnowski
(44).
589
Fluid and Electrolytes
Water is the largest component of the body, representing 45% to
75% of a person’ s body weight (75). In the human body, water acts
as a lubricant, shock absorber , building material, and solvent.
Additional ly, water is essential for body temper ature regulation
(water loss through sweat helps cool off skin, particularly in hot
environments and during exercise), nutrient transport and waste
product removal, and maintaining fluid balance and therefore normal
blood pressure (81). Water is so important that even under optimal
temper ature condi tions, the body can surviv e only a few days
without w ater.
While maintaining adequate hydration  is important for all
individuals, athletes must pay close attention to their hydration
status since sweat losses that exceed fluid intake can quickly lead to
a hypohydrated state with a subsequent increase in core body
temper ature, decrease in blood plasma volume, and increase in
heart rate and perceived exertion (32, 139). When this happens,
sweat output cannot keep up with increases in core body
temper ature unless fluids are given. Repeated exercise in hot
environments helps the body adapt to heat stress (e.g., greater
sweat volume, lower electr olyte concentr ation of sweat, and lower
temper ature for the onset of sweating), and therefore athletes may
be more prone to dehydration  and heat stress at the begin ning of
the season (54). In addition, athletes with less training may be more
prone to heat stress than trained athletes (32). Due to physiological
changes that alter water conserv ation in the body as well as age-
related decline in fluid intake, the elderly have an increased risk of
dehydration and hypohydration  (32). Children may have a greater
risk of dehydration as well, resulting from increased heat gain from
the environment due to greater surface area–body mass ratio
compar ed to adults, increased heat production during  exercise,
decreased ability to dissipate heat through sweat, and a decreased
sensation of thirst compar ed to adults (12, 46). Additional ly, those
590
with sickle cell trait, cystic fibrosis, and some other diseas es have an
increased risk of becoming dehydrated (12, 163). Even mild
dehydration, representing 2% to 3% weight loss, can increase core
body temperature and significantly affect athletic performance by
increasing fatigue and decreasing motiv ation, neuromuscular control,
accuracy, power , strength, muscular endur ance, and overall
performance (13, 26, 42, 58, 84, 85, 141, 153). Dehydration can
increase core body temper ature, reduce stroke volume and cardiac
output, decrease blood pressure, reduce blood flow to muscles,
increase heartbeat, exacerbate symptomatic exertional
rhabdom yolysis, and increase risk of heatstr oke and death (3, 32,
108). One’s risk for dehydration, and subsequent heat stress, is
greater in hot, humid en vironments and at al titude (27 , 108, 146).
Fluid Balance
Fluid balance  is the balanc e between water intake from food,
drinks, and metabol ic water and water output through expired air,
insensible perspiration, sweat, feces, and urine. It is important for a
person to consume adequate sources of water to prevent
dehydration from excess water loss. The AI for water is 3.7 liters
(125.1 fl oz or 15.6 cups) and 2.7 L (91.3 fl oz or 11.4 cups) per day,
respectiv ely, for men and women. Howev er, the AI for pregnant and
lactating wome n is 3 liters (101.4 fl oz or 12.7 cups) and 3.8 liters
(128.5 fl oz or 16.1 cups) per day, respectiv ely. All sources of fluid,
including beverages such as coffee, tea, juice, and soda, as well as
the fluid in foods, contribute to meeting a person’ s water needs from
dietary sour ces (75).
Maintaining fluid balance during training and competi tion can be a
challenge for many athletes, particularly those who sweat profusely
or train in hot, humid environments or at altitude. In addition to
environmental condi tions, clothing, equipment, and larger body size
can increase sweat rate, while unsaf e weight loss practices such as
frequent use or overuse of diuretics or laxativ es can increase risk of
dehydration (32, 38). America n footbal l players, particular ly linemen,
591
have a greater risk of becoming dehydrated becaus e of their
equipment and, in many cases, larger body size (32). For example, a
study in National Footbal l League players found that backs and
receivers, with an average body mass of 93 ± 6 kilograms (205.0 ±
13.2 lb), lost an average of 1.4 ± 0.45 liters (47.3 ± 15.2 fl oz; or
approximately 6 ± 2 cups) of sweat per hour, while lineme n, with an
average body mass of 135.6  ± 17 kilograms (298.9 ± 37.5 lb), lost
an average 2.25 ± 0.68 liters (76.1 ± 23.0 fl oz; approximately 9.5
± 2.9 cups) of sweat per hour during practice. Calculated sweat
losses for both groups during a total of 4.5 hours of practice on days
with two practice sessions were 6.4 ± 2.0 liters (216.4 ± 67.6 fl oz;
approximately 27.1 ± 8.5 cups) for backs and receivers and 10.1 ±
3.1 liters (341.5 ± 104.8 fl oz; 42.7 ± 13.1 cups) for linemen (55).
Multiple layers of clothing and protectiv e equipment contribute to
sweat losses and dehydration risk in hockey players (14), while
intentional dehydration and other unsaf e weight loss practices can
increase dehydration risk in wrestlers (170). In addition, it is
important to note that a very wide range of fluid losses through
sweat exists. For instance, National Basketball Association players
lost from 1.0 to 4.6 liters (33.8-155.5 fl oz; 4.2-19.4 cups) and had a
mean loss of 2.2 ± 0.8 liters (74.4 ± 27.1 fl oz; 9.3 ± 3.4 cups) of
sweat over the course of a 40-minute game in which the average
playing time was 21 ± 8 minutes (120). To reduce the risk of
dehydration and heat stress, athletes should avoid exercising under
extremely hot, humid condi tions and should adequately replace fluid
losses f rom pr olonged ex ertion.
Preventing Dehydration
Given the negativ e effects associated with dehydration, athletes
should try to prevent water weight losses exceeding 2% of body
weight while also restoring electr olytes lost through sweat (3, 139).
The first step to preventing dehydration is to assess hydration status
(table 10.15 ). Urine specific gravity (USG) can be used to assess
hydration status because the test is easy to use, inexpe nsive, and
592
portable (168). Howev er, USG is not a sensitive indicator of acute
changes in hydration; instead it is better as a measur e of chronic
hydration status (120, 131). A quick and simple method for
estimating hydration status involves measuring change s in body
weight from before to after a workout. Athletes should weigh
themselv es in minimal, lightweight clothing, after drying off and
urinating, immediately before and after their workout. Sweaty
clothes should  be removed before weighing. Each pound  (0.45 kg)
lost during practice represents 16 ounces (0.47 L) of fluid. A loss of
2% or more of body weight indicates the athlete is not adequately
replacing fluid lost through sweat (3). In addition to identi fying acute
dehydration from one workout, assessing weight changes over time
may help identi fy athletes who are chronical ly dehydrated—those
who lose several pounds over the course of a few days (24). See
table 10.15  for biomark ers of pr oper or suf ficient h ydration.
TABLE 10.15  Biomarkers of Hydration Status
Measure PracticalityValidity (acute vs. chronic
changes) EUH cutoff
Total body w ater Low Acute and chr onic <2%
Plasma osmolal ity Medium Acute and chr onic <290 mOsm
Urine speci fic gravityHigh Chronic <1.020 g/mL
Urine osmolal ity High Chronic <700 mOsm
Body weight High Acute and chr onic* <1%
Note:  EUH = euh ydration.
*Potential ly confounded by changes in body composi tion during very prolonged
assessment periods.
Reprinted by permission from American College of Sports Medicine, M.N. Sawka, L.M.
Burke, et al., “American College of Sports Medicine Position Stand: Exercise and Fluid
Replacement, ” Medicine & S cience in Sports & Ex ercise 39, no . 2 (2007): 377-390.
In addition to identifying athletes who do not adequately hydrate,
one can calculate sweat rate, thereby giving a better idea of fluid
needs during exercise, by weighing athletes before exercise and
593
again after an intense 1-hou r practice session while also measuring
fluid intake and urine volume produced. Sweat rate is equal to
preexercise body weight minus postex ercise body weight + fluid
intake during exercise − urine produced (14, 24). Assessments of
urine quanti ty, through USG or urine volume, may be misleading
during the immediate rehydration period after dehydration. When
athletes consume large quanti ties of hypotonic fluid, they produce
copious amounts of urine long before they become adequately
hydrated (147 , 148).
In addition to monitoring weight changes, athletes are sometimes
advised to check their urine color. Howev er, the relationship between
urine color and hydration status is very subjectiv e (3, 108). Also,
beets, blackberries, certain food colors, and medications can turn
urine pink, red, or light brown (9). In addition, B vitamins,
carotenoids (such as beta carotene), and some medications can turn
urine dark yellow, bright yellow, or orange, while artificial food colors
(such as those  found in some  sport drinks) may also turn urine blue
or green (9).
A very wide range of fluid losses, in the form of sweat,
exists among  athletes. Therefore each athlete should
develop an individualized hydration plan.
Electrolytes
The major electr olytes lost in sweat include sodium chloride and, to
a lesser extent and in order, potassium, magnesium, and calcium
(89). Sodium influences fluid regulation by helping retain more of
the fluid consumed (107). In addition, all of the electr olytes lost
through sweat are essential to muscle contraction and nerve
conduction. Thus, any disturbance in the balance of electrolytes in
body fluids could potential ly interfere with performance. Sodium
losses through sweat vary tremendously between athletes, with
reported conce ntrations ranging from 0.2 to greater than 12.5 g/L
(10 to over 544 mEq/L) (3, 32). Given the large quanti ty of sodium
594
some athletes lose through sweat, replacing sodium losses may
require a conscious decision to choose higher -sodium foods, salt
their food, and add electr olytes to their sport drinks. Athletes who
exercise intens ely or for hours and hydrate excessiv ely with only
water or a no- or low-sodium beverage may dilute their blood
sodium levels to danger ously low levels—below 130 mmol/L —a
condi tion called hyponatremia . This leads to intracellular swelling,
and, when blood sodium levels fall below 125 mmol/L, to headaches,
nausea, vomiting, muscle cramps, swollen hands and feet,
restlessness, and disorientation. When blood sodium drops below
120 mmol/L, risk of developing cerebral edema, seizur es, coma,
brain stem herniation, respiratory arrest, and risk of death increase
(2, 3, 6). To avoid hyponatr emia, fluid intake should not exceed
sweat losses (athletes should not weigh more after they finish
exercising than they did at the start of their training session), and
athletes should consume sodium through either sport drinks or food
(3, 120).
Sport drinks provide small amounts of potassium to replace sweat
potassium losses. Howev er, they are not a significant contributor to
total potassium intake. Because resear ch shows that less than 2% of
adults in the United States meet the dietary recommen dations for
potassium (31), athletes should focus on consuming more
potassium-rich foods in their diet, such as tomatoes, citrus fruits,
melons, potatoes, bananas, and mi lk.
Athletes who exercise intensely or for hours and hydrate
excessively with only water or a no- or low-sodium
beverage may dilute their blood sodium to dangerously
low levels.
Fluid Intake G uidelines
Ideally, athletes should start exercise or training in a hydrated state,
avoid losing more than 2% of body weight (due to sweat losses)
during exercise, and rehydrate completely after exercise and before
595
the next training session. The amount of fluid necessary to fully
achiev e rehydration depends on the time period before the next bout
of training. However, studies  show that some athletes start practice
or competition in a hypohydrated state, making it more difficult to
consume enough fluid during the exercise session to make up for
poor preexercise hydration status (120, 134). Additional ly, athletes
with significant sweat losses may not voluntari ly drink enough fluid
to adequately rehydrate and prevent dehydration during training and
competi tion. A systematic approach to fluid replacement is necessary
for this reason and also because thirst may not be a reliable
indicator of fluid needs for athletes who are heavy sweaters or those
who are practicing intensely in hot environmental condi tions (24).
Though fluid and electr olyte guidel ines should be individual ized as
much as possible, given the wide range of fluid and electr olyte
losses in athletes, the gener al guidel ines presented next are a good
starting place with athletes until specific recommendations can be
provided based on sweat rate (6). Additional ly, strength and
condi tioning professionals should ensur e that athletes are given
adequate time to drink and access to cool fluids (10-15  °C [50-59
°F]) (82).
Before Activity
Prehydrate, if necessary , several hours before exercise to allow for
fluid absorption and urine output (3).
During Activity
Due to large variations in sweat rates and electr olyte concentrations,
athletes should measur e weight changes during training and
competi tion in specific weath er condi tions and develop individual ized
hydration strategies based on this information (3). During prolonged
activity in hot weather , the IOM recommends sport drinks containing
20 to 30 mEq of sodium (460-690 mg with chloride as the anion) per
liter, 2 to 5 mEq of potassium (78-195 mg) per liter, and
carboh ydrate in a concentr ation of 5% to 10% (70). Additional ly,
596
when a sport drink is ingested at high rates during intense or
prolonged exercise, athletes may want to choose one that contains
multiple types of carboh ydrates with different intestina l transport
mechanisms, such as glucose, fructose, and maltodextrin . Ingestion
of multiple types of carboh ydrate versus a single carboh ydrate will
lead to greater gastric emptying, carboh ydrate absorption, oxidation,
and possibly better performance (36, 83). All beverages provided
should be cool—10-15 °C (50-59 °F)—but not cold (24).
The American Academ y of Pediatrics recommends periodic
drinking be enforced in children. These guidel ines suggest that
children weigh ing 88 pounds (40 kg) drink 5 ounces (148 mL) of
cold water or a flavored salted beverage every 20 minutes during
practice and that adolescents weighing 132 pounds (60 kg) drink 9
ounces (266 mL) even if they do not feel thirsty. Another
recommendation is a sodium chloride concentr ation of 15 to 20
mmol/L (1 g per 2 pints), which has been shown to increase
voluntary hydration by 90% when compar ed to unflavored water
(34, 171).
After Activity
After exercise, athletes should replace fluid and electr olyte losses. If
time permi ts, normal meals, snacks (provided that they contain
some sodium), and water will restore fluid and electr olyte losses.
Additional salt can be added to foods when sweat sodium  losses are
substantial (3, 75). If dehydration is significant, or the athlete has a
short recovery period before the next bout of exercise (<12 h), a
more aggressive approach is warranted: Athletes should  consume
approximately 1.5 L (51 ounces) of fluid (with sufficient electr olytes)
for each kilogram of body weight loss (0.7 L or 24 oz or 3 cups for
each pound of body weight). This amount of fluid helps account for
increased urine production stemming from the consumption of a
large volume of fluid (3, 147).
597
Fluid Intake G uidelines at a Glance
Before Training
Athletes should have a USG reading  <1.02. They should prehydrate, if
necessary , several hours before exercise to allow for fluid absorption and
urine output (3).
During a Training Session
Children and Adolescents
Children weighing 88 pounds (40 kg) should drink 5 ounces (148 mL) of cold
water or a fla vored, sal ted bev erage ev ery 20 minutes during tr aining (34).
Adolescents weighin g 132 pounds (60 kg) should drink 9 ounces (266 mL) of
cold w ater or a fla vored, sal ted bev erage ev ery 20 minutes (171).
Adults
Athletes should follow an individual ized hydration plan. During prolonged
activity in hot weather , they should consume a sport drink containing 20 to
30 mEq of sodium (460-690 mg with chloride as the anion) per liter, 2 to 5
mEq of potassium (78-195 mg) per liter, and carboh ydrate in a concentr ation
of 5% to 10%.
After Training
Athletes should consume adequate food and fluids, as well as sodium, to
restore hydration. If dehydration is significant or the athlete has <12 hours
before the next exercise bout, a more aggressive approach is warranted and
the athlete should consume approximately 1.5 liters (51 oz) of fluid (with
sufficient electr olytes) for each kilogram of body weight lost (0.7 L or 24 oz
or 3 cups f or each pound of body weight).
598
Conclusion
Nutrition plays an important role in strength and condi tioning.
Adequate hydration and electr olytes; appropriate energy intake; and
adequate protein, carboh ydrate, fat, vitamin, and miner al intakes
allow athletes to reap maximal benefi ts from training. A gener al
understanding of nutrition principles and applications is essential for
strength and condi tioning professionals so that they can help
athletes sort through nutrition misinf ormation and provide sound
guidel ines that athletes can use to impr ove their diets.
KEY TERMS
Acceptable Macr onutrient Distribution R ange (AMDR)
Adequate I ntake (AI)
amino acids
anemia
bioavailability
carboh ydrate
cholester ol
dehydration
Dietary R eference I ntakes (DRI s)
disaccharides
docosahexaenoic acid (DHA)
eicosapentaenoic acid (EP A)
electr olytes
Estimated A verage R equirement (EAR)
fat
fatty acids
fiber
fluid balance
fructose
galactose
gluconeogenesis
599
glucose
glycemic index (GI)
glycemic load
glycogen
glycogenesis
high-densi ty lipoprotein (HDL)
hydration
hypohydration
hyponatr emia
lactose
low-densi ty lipoprotein (LDL)
macronutrient
maltose
micronutrient
miner als
monosac charides
monounsatur ated
muscle pr otein synthesis
MyPlate
nutrient densi ty
omega-3 f atty acid alpha-l inolenic acid (AL A)
polypeptide
polysac charides
polyunsatur ated
protein
protein digestibi lity
protein digestibi lity corr ect amino acid scor e (PDCAA S)
Recommended Dietary Al lowances (RDA)
saturated
sports dieti tian
sucrose
Tolerable Upper I ntake Lev el (UL)
triglycerides
vegan
600
very low -densi ty lipoproteins (VLDL)
vitamins
STUDY QUESTIONS
  1.  Which of the following is the player development staff member
who has the most accurate nutrition knowledge and is best to
counsel athletes wi th complex nutri tional needs?
  a.  athletic tr ainer
  b.  strength and condi tioning pr ofessional
  c.  sports dieti tian
  d.  ph ysical ther apist
  2.  Which of the following food groups are illustrated in the
MyPlate icon?
  a.  oi ls, proteins, w ater, fiber , vitamins, and miner als
  b.  protein f oods, f ruits, vegetables, gr ains, and dairy
  c.  pr oteins, carboh ydrates, f ats, and w ater
  d.  macr onutrients, micr onutrients, w ater
  3.  Which of the following is the recommended intake of protein
for athletes?
  a.  0. 7 to 0.8 gr ams pr otein per ki logram body weight per da y
  b.  0.8 to 1.0 gr ams pr otein per ki logram body weight per da y
  c.  1.2 to 1.4 gr ams pr otein per ki logram body weight per da y
  d.  1.2 to 2.0 gr ams pr otein per ki logram body weight per da y
  4.  For optimal health, which of the following is the recommended
amount of added sugars in the diet?
  a.  less than 5% of total calories
  b.  less than 10% of total calories
  c.  mor e than 15% of total calories
  d.  mor e than 20% of total calories
  6.  Which of the following actions should athletes take to assess
fluid losses after ex ercise?
  a.  check urine color
  b.  check their body temper ature
601
  c.  weigh themselv es bef ore and after ex ercise
  d.  measur e how much w ater they dr ank during ex ercise
TABLE 10.1  Food Group Recommendations From
MyPlate
Population
and age
rangeEstimated
daily
calories
for those
who are
not
physically
fitaFruitbVegetablescGrainsdProtein
foodseDairy and
fortified soy
alternativesf
Children2-3 1,000 1-1.5
cups1 to 1.5 cups 3-5 oz
equiv alents
(1.5-2.5
cups)24 oz
equiv alents2-2.5 cups
4-8 1,200-
1,4001-2
cups1.5-2.5 cups 4-6 oz
equiv alents
(2-3 cups)3-5.5 oz
equiv alents2.5 cups
Girls 9-
131,600 1.5-2
cups1.5-3 cups 5-7 oz
equiv alents
(2.5-3.5
cups)4-6 oz
equiv alents3 cups
14-
181,800 1.5-2
cups2.5-3 cups 6-8 oz
equiv alents
(3-4 cups)5-6.5 oz
equiv alents3 cups
Boys 9-
131,800 1.5-2
cups2-3.5 cups 5-9 oz
equiv alents
(2.5-4 .5
cups)5-6.5 oz
equiv alents3 cups
14-
182,200 2-2.5
cups2.5-4 cups 6-10 oz
equiv alents
(3-5 cups)5.5-7 oz
equiv alents3 cups
Females 19-
302,000 1.5-2
cups2.5-3 cups 6-8 oz
equiv alents
(3-4 cups)5-6.5 oz
equiv alents3 cups
602
Population
and age
rangeEstimated
daily
calories
for those
who are
not
physically
fitaFruitbVegetablescGrainsdProtein
foodseDairy and
fortified soy
alternativesf
31-
591,800 1.5-2
cups2-3 cups 5-7 oz
equiv alents
(2.5-3.5
cups)5-6 oz
equiv alents3 cups
60+ 1,600 1.5-2
cups2-3 cups 5-7 oz
equiv alents
(2.5-3.5
cups)5-6 oz
equiv alents3 cups
Males 19-
302,400 2-2.5
cups3-4 cups 8-10 oz
equiv alents
(4 to 5
cups)6.5-7 oz
equiv alents3 cups
31-
592,200 2-2.5
cups3-4 cups 7-10 oz
equiv alents
(3.5-5
cups)6-7 oz
equiv alents3 cups
60+ 2,000 2
cups2.5-3.5 cups 6-9 oz
equiv alents
(3-4.5
cups)5.5-6.5 oz
equiv alents3 cups
603
Population
and age
rangeEstimated
daily
calories
for those
who are
not
physically
fitaFruitbVegetablescGrainsdProtein
foodseDairy and
fortified soy
alternativesf
The amount needed from each group depends on age, sex, height, weight, and level of
physical activity. The amount can also depend on whether the individual is pregnant or
breastfeeding. Gener al recommendations b y age ar e shown in the chart.
aThese amounts are appropriate for individuals who get less than 30 minutes of moder ate
physical activity most days. Those who are more physical ly active may be able to consume
more while staying within the daily caloric need. To find an individual’ s daily caloric need,
go to www.myplate .gov/myplate -plan.
bSee table 10.2  for MyPlate Cup of Frui t Table.
cSee table 10.3  for MyPlate Cup of V egetables T able.
dSee table 10.4  for MyPlate Ounce-Equiv alent of Gr ains T able.
eSee table 10.5  for MyPlate Ounce-Equiv alent of Pr oteins T able.
fSee table 10.6  for MyPlate Cup of Dairy T able.
Fruit. In gener al, 1 cup of fruit or 100% fruit juice or 1/2 cup of dried fruit can be
consider ed as 1 cup f rom the Frui t Group.
Vegetables.  Any vegetable or 100% vegetable juice counts as a member of the Vegetable
Group. Vegetables may be raw or cooked; fresh, frozen, canned, or dried-deh ydrated; and
may be whole, cut up, or mashed. Vegetables in their nutrient -dense forms have limited
additions such as sal t, but ter, or cr eamy sauces.
Grains. Any food made from wheat, rice, oats, cornmeal, barley , or another cereal grain is a
grain product. Bread, pasta, breakfast cereals, tortillas, and grits are examples of grain
products. Foods such as popcorn, rice, and oatmeal are included in the grains group. Half
of one’s grains should be whole grains. Whole grains have the entire kernel, which includes
the bran, germ, and endosperm. Some whole grain examples are whole- wheat flour, bulgur ,
oatmeal, and br own rice.
Protein foods.  All foods made from meat, poultry, seafood, beans and peas, eggs,
processed soy products, nuts, and seeds are consider ed part of the Protein Foods Group.
Beans and peas are also part of the Vegetable Group. In gener al, 1 ounce of meat, poultry,
or fish; 1/4 cup cooked beans; 1 egg; 1 tablespoon of peanut butter; 1/2 ounce of nuts or
seeds; 1/4 cup (about 2 oz) of tofu; or 1 ounce of tempeh, cooked, can be consider ed as 1
ounce-equiv alent from the Protein Foods Group. Many Americans get the right amount of
protein needed from meat, poultry, and eggs but do not meet the recommendations for
seafood or nuts, seeds, and soy products. Meeting this can help increase the amount of
important nutrients the body needs, l ike unsatur ated f ats, dietary fiber , and vi tamin D .
604
Population
and age
rangeEstimated
daily
calories
for those
who are
not
physically
fitaFruitbVegetablescGrainsdProtein
foodseDairy and
fortified soy
alternativesf
Dairy. The Dairy Group includes milk, yogurt, cheese, lactose-f ree milk and fortified soy
milk, and yogurt. Foods made from milk that have little to no calcium and a high fat
content, such as cr eam cheese, cr eam, and but ter, are not consider ed dairy f oods.
U.S. Department of Agricul ture
TABLE 10.2  MyPlate Cup of Fruit Table
Fruit Amount that counts as 1 cup of fruit
Apple 1 smal l or 1/2 lar ge apple
1 cup , sliced or chopped, f resh
2/3 cup , baked
1/2 cup , dried
Applesauce 1 cup applesauce
Banana 1 large banana
1 cup , sliced
2/3 cup , mashed
Blueberries 1 cup , fresh or f rozen
1/3 cup , dried
Cantaloupe 1 cup , diced or melon bal ls
Grapes 22 seedless gr apes
1 cup , whole or cut up
Grapefruit 1 medium gr apefruit
1 cup , sections
Kiwifruit 2 to 3 kiwi fruits
1 cup , sliced or chopped
Mango 7 slices or chunks, f resh or f rozen
1 cup , fresh or f rozen
1/3 cup , dried
U.S. Department of Agricul ture
605
Fruit Amount that counts as 1 cup of fruit
Mixed fruit (fruit cocktai l) 1 cup , diced or sl iced, f resh or canned, dr ained
Orange 1 large orange
1 cup , sections
Peach 1 large peach
1 cup , sliced or diced, f resh, cook ed, frozen or
canned, dr ained
2 halv es, canned
Pear 1 medium pear
1 cup , sliced or diced, f resh, cook ed, or canned,
drained
Pineapple 1 cup , chunks, sl iced or crushed, f resh, cook ed
or canned, dr ained
Plum 3 medium or 2 lar ge plums
1 cup , sliced, f resh or cook ed
1/2 cup , dried (prunes)
Strawberries About 8 lar ge str awberries
1 cup , whole, halv ed, or sl iced, f resh or f rozen
Watermelon 1 smal l wedge or sl ice
1 cup , diced or melon bal ls
Dried f ruit (e.g. , raisins, prunes,
apricots, figs)1/2 cup dried f ruit
100% f ruit juice (e.g. , orange, apple,
grape, gr apefruit)1 cup
U.S. Department of Agricul ture
TABLE 10.3  MyPlate Cup of Vegetable Table
Vegetable
group VegetableAmount that
counts as 1 cup of
vegetables
Dark gr een
vegetablesBroccoli 1 cup , chopped or
florets, fresh or
frozen
U.S. Department of Agricul ture
606
Vegetable
group VegetableAmount that
counts as 1 cup of
vegetables
Amaranth lea ves, beet gr eens, B ok cho y, broccoli
rabe (r apini), char d, col lards (col lard greens), cr ess,
dandel ion gr eens, kale, mustar d greens, spinach,
Swiss char d, watercress1 cup , cook ed
2 cups, f resh
Raw leaf y greens:  arugula (r ocket), basi l, cilantro,
dark gr een leaf y lettuce, endiv e, escar ole, mix ed
greens, mesclun, r omaine2 cups, f resh
Red and
orange
vegetablesCarrots 2 medium carr ots
1 cup , sliced or
chopped, f resh,
cooked or f rozen
1 cup bab y carr ots
Pumpkin, calabaza 1 cup , mashed,
cooked
Red and or ange bel l peppers 1 large bel l pepper
1 cup , chopped,
fresh, or cook ed
Sweet potato 1 large sweet
potato , baked
1 cup , sliced or
mashed, cook ed
Tomatoes 1 large tomato
2 smal l tomatoes
1 cup , chopped or
sliced, f resh,
canned, or cook ed
100% v egetable juice 1 cup
Winter squash (acorn, but ternut, Hubbar d,
kabocha)1 cup , cubed,
cooked
Beans, peas,
and lenti lsDry beans and peas and lenti ls (ba yo, black, br own,
fava, garbanz o, kidney , lima, mung, na vy, pigeon,
pink, pinto , soy, or whi te beans; black -eyed peas1 cup , whole or
mashed, cook ed
U.S. Department of Agricul ture
607
Vegetable
group VegetableAmount that
counts as 1 cup of
vegetables
[cow peas] or spl it peas; and r ed, br own, and
green lenti ls)
Starchy
vegetablesCassa va 3/4 cup , cook ed
Corn, y ellow or whi te 1 large ear of corn
1 cup corn k ernels,
fresh or f rozen
Green peas 1 cup , fresh or
frozen
Plantains 3/4 cup , cook ed
White potatoes 1 medium whi te
potato , boiled or
baked
1 cup , diced,
mashed, f resh or
frozen
Other
vegetablesAspar agus 1 cup
Avocado 1 avocado
Bean spr outs 1 cup , cook ed
Cabbage, gr een, r ed, napa, sa voy 1 cup , chopped or
shredded r aw or
cooked
Cauliflower 1 cup , pieces or
florets raw or
cooked, fresh or
frozen
Celery 1 cup , diced or
sliced, r aw or
cooked
2 large stalks (11 "
to 12" long)
Cucumbers 1 cup , raw, sliced or
chopped
U.S. Department of Agricul ture
608
Vegetable
group VegetableAmount that
counts as 1 cup of
vegetables
Green or w ax beans 1 cup , raw or
cooked
Green bel l peppers 1 large bel l pepper
1 cup , chopped, r aw
or cook ed, fresh or
frozen
Lettuce, iceber g or head 2 cups, r aw,
shredded or
chopped
Mushr ooms 1 cup , raw or
cooked
Okra 1 cup , cook ed
Onions 1 cup , chopped, r aw
or cook ed
Summer squash or zuc chini 1 cup , cook ed,
sliced or diced
U.S. Department of Agricul ture
TABLE 10.4  MyPlate Ounce-Equivalent of Grains
Table
GrainAmount that counts as 1 oz equivalent of
grains
Bagels 2" mini bagel
Bagel or pi ta chips 1/3 cup bagel or pi ta chips
Barley 1/2 cup , cook ed
Buckwheat 1/2 cup , cook ed
Breads 1 regular sl ice of br ead
1 smal l slice of Fr ench br ead
4 snack -size slices of ry e bread
U.S. Department of Agricul ture
609
GrainAmount that counts as 1 oz equivalent of
grains
Bulgur 1/2 cup , cook ed
Challah br ead 1 medium or r egular sl iced
Cornbr ead 1 smal l piece
Couscous 1/2 cup , cook ed
Crackers 5 whole wheat cr ackers
2 rye crisp br eads
7 squar e or r ound cr ackers
English muf fins 1/2 Engl ish muf fin
Muffins 1 smal l muffin
Oatmeal 1/2 cup , cook ed
1 pack et instant
1 oz (1/3 cup) dry (r egular or quick)
Pancak es 1 pancak e (4-1/2 " diameter)
2 smal l pancak es (3" diameter)
Pasta (spaghet ti, macar oni,
noodles)1/2 cup , cook ed
1 oz, dry
Popcorn 3 cups, popped
Quinoa 1/2 cup , cook ed
Ready-to-eat br eakfast cer eal 1 cup , flakes or r ounds
1-1/4 cup , puffed
Rice 1/2 cup , cook ed
1 oz, dry
Tortillas 1 smal l flour torti lla (6" diameter)
1 corn torti lla (6" diameter)
U.S. Department of Agricul ture
TABLE 10.5  MyPlate Ounce-Equivalent of Proteins
Table
Protein Amount that counts as 1 oz equivalent of protein
610
Protein Amount that counts as 1 oz equivalent of protein
Meats 1 oz cook ed lean beef , goat, ham, lamb , or pork
1 oz cook ed lean gr ound beef or pork
1 slice of luncheon or del i meats (beef , chick en, ham, pork, turk ey)
1 oz cook ed game meats (bear , bison, deer , elk, moose, opossum, r abbit,
venison)
1 oz cook ed organ meats
Poultry 1 oz cook ed (wi thout skin) chick en, ostrich, or turk ey
2 oz cook ed Cornish hen, duck, goose, pheasant, or quai l
1 sandwich sl ice of turk ey or chick en breast (4-1/2 " × 2-1/2 " × 1/8 ")
Seafood 1 oz cook ed finfish (black sea bass, catfish, cod, flounder , freshwater
trout, haddock, hak e, hal ibut, herring, l ight tuna, mack erel, mul let, per ch,
pollock, salmon, sea bass, snapper , sole, ti lapia, whi ting)
1 oz cook ed shel lfish (clams, cr ab, crayfish, lobster , mussels, octopus,
oysters, scal lops, shrimp , squid [calamari])
1 oz canned fish (ancho vies, f reshwater tr out, herring, l ight tuna, salmon,
sardines)
Eggs 1 egg
1-1/2 egg whi tes (or 3 tbsp l iquid egg whi te product)
Nuts, seeds,
and so y
products1/2 oz of nuts (12 almonds, 24 pistachios, 7 w alnut halv es)
1/2 oz of seeds (chia, flax, pumpkin, sesame, sunflower , or squash
seeds), hul led, roasted
1 tbsp of almond, cashew , peanut, or sunflower but ter, or sesame paste
(tahini)
1/4 cup (about 2 oz) of tof u
1 oz tempeh, cook ed
Beans, peas,
and lenti ls1/4 cup of cook ed beans, peas, or lenti ls (ba yo, black, br own, f ava,
garbanz o, kidney , lima, mung, na vy, pigeon, pink, pinto , soy, or whi te
beans; black -eyed peas [cow peas] or spl it peas; and r ed, br own, and
green lenti ls)
1/4 cup of bak ed beans or r efried beans
1 falafel pat ty (2-1/4 ", 4 oz)
6 tbsp hummus
U.S. Department of Agricul ture
TABLE 10.6  MyPlate Cup of Dairy Table
Dairy Amount that counts as 1 cup of dairy
611
Dairy Amount that counts as 1 cup of dairy
Milk 1 cup mi lk
1 half-pint container mi lk
1/2 cup ev aporated mi lk
1 cup calcium-f ortified so y milk
1 half-pint container calcium-f ortified so y milk
Yogurt 1 cup y ogurt (dairy or f ortified so y)
Cheese 1-1/2 oz har d cheese (cheddar , mozzar ella, Swiss, P armesan)
1/3 cup shr edded cheese
1 oz pr ocessed cheese (American)
1/2 cup ricot ta cheese
2 cups cot tage cheese
2 oz queso f resco
2 slices queso blanco
U.S. Department of Agricul ture
612