# Section 11.3

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 11: Nutrition Strategies for Maximizing Performance

**Section:** 11.3 -- Postcompetition Nutrition

**PDF Pages:** 636--645

pulldown, biceps curl, triceps extension) exercises performed first thing in the
morning after an overnight fast. After exercise each day and at breakfast on
nontraining days they consumed a nutrition drink contai ning 30 grams of milk
protein, 25.9 grams of carboh ydrate, and 3.4 grams of fat. The study authors
found no relationship betwe en the acute rise (6 hours posttraining) in muscle
protein synthe sis due to exercise training and the nutrition drink provided and
muscle hypertr ophy. Howev er, the authors also noted that changes in muscle
protein synthesis with training were not uniform between study subjects;
therefore, though acute changes in muscle protein synth esis are important for
muscle hypertr ophy, they are not the sole factor that predicts a person’ s
potential to increase muscle growth (86). Thirty grams of milk protein, as used in
this study, provides an estimated 24 grams of casein, 6 grams of whey protein,
and a total of 2.8 gr ams of leucine (139).
Concurrent Training
Exercise interference is a concept suggesting that aerobic endur ance exercise,
when combine d with resistance training (back -to-back sessions), blunts gains in
strength comp ared to resistance training alone but results in improvements in
aerobic endur ance performance (148). While interest in concurr ent training-
based resear ch has increased over time, nutrition recommendations for
concurr ent training are often based on isolated studies examining the impact of
nutrition interv entions on aerobic endur ance or resistance training alone. The
consumption of carboh ydrate after aerobic endur ance exercise and before lifting
can help suppr ess skeletal muscle breakdown. Also, given the impact of protein
intake after aerobic endur ance exercise on muscle protein synthesis, as well as
the resear ch suggesting that protein intake during prolonged (>2 h) resistance
training supports greater rates of muscle protein synthesis during exercise
compar ed to a carboh ydrate control, athletes should consider consuming protein
after aerobic endur ance exercise, before lifting, or during their lifting session if
performing aer obic endur ance ex ercise first (107).
Daily Protein Intake
While ingestio n of protein around training is beneficial for athletes to aid in
recovery and adaptation, this may have relatively little benefit if daily intake is
sufficient. For this reason, protein consumption with each meal represents an
ideal strategy to meet these needs and maintain a positive physiological
environment for athletes. Resistance training has the ability to increase muscle
sensitivity to amino acids for 24 to 48 hours after exercise whereas the anabol ic
effect of a meal lasts approximately 3 to 5 hours. For optimal muscle remodel ing,
experts suggest consuming at least 20 to 40 grams of protein per meal and
636
eating meals every 3 to 4 hours (81, 107) in order to facilitate meeting daily
protein tar gets.
The amount of data on muscle protein synthesis in children is limited because
invasive measur ement procedur es are required (17), and no studies have
examined muscle protein synthesis after training and postwork out protein
ingestion in healthy children. Howev er, one thing is clear with regard to children:
Due to size differences as well as the impact of insulin and calorie intake on
protein synthe sis, their per-meal protein intake targets will naturally be lower in
order to meet their protein needs (79), despite potential ly having higher relative
needs. F or mor e information about pr otein needs b y sport, see table 11.3 .
Nutrition for Various Performance Goals
Nutrition for Aerobic Endurance Performance and Recovery
•  Aerobic endurance athletes should aim to consume 8 to 10 grams of carboh ydrate during their
most demanding training phases or competi tion and 1.4 to 2.0 grams of protein per kilogram body
weight per da y throughout their tr aining.
•  Athletes who eat at least 4 hours before competi tion should include approximately 1 to 4
grams of carboh ydrate per kilogram body weight and 0.15 to 0.25 grams of protein per kilogram
body weight (131). If the precompet ition meal is consumed 2 hours before exercise, athletes
should aim for approximately 1 gram of carboh ydrate per kilogram body weight (120) and 0.15 to
0.25 gr ams of easi ly digestible pr otein per ki logram body weight.
•  Athletes should consume 28 to 144 grams of a mixtur e of multiple types of carboh ydrate (e.g.,
sucrose, fructose, and glucose or maltodextrin) per hour during prolonged aerobic endur ance
exercise to extend time unti l exhaustion and impr ove perf ormance (32, 34 , 66, 137).
•  During prolonged activity in hot weath er, athletes should consume sport drinks containing 20
to 30 mEq of sodium (460-690 mg with chloride as the anion) per liter, 2 to 5 mEq of potassium
(78-195 mg) per l iter, and carboh ydrate in a concentr ation of 5% to 10% (2).
•  After exercise, approximately 1.2 to 2.0 grams of carboh ydrate per kilogram body weight
should be consume d within 30 minutes after stopping the exercise. The addition of protein appears
to facilitate glycogen replenishment if carboh ydrate intake is below 1.2 grams per kilogram.
Additional ly, some, though not all, studies show that the addition of protein to carboh ydrate after a
workout may attenuate muscle breakdown and soreness and increase muscle protein synthesis.
The ideal amount of protein and the time period after exercise in which it should be consumed are
not clear based on the current body of literature and may depend on whether the exercise was
performed in the fed versus fasted state and on total calories consumed after a workout (44, 57,
85). Howe ver, as a gener al guidel ine, at least 20 to 40 grams of high-qual ity protein should also be
consumed within a 2-hour time period after aerobic endur ance exercise (sooner may be better,
though the exact time period has y et to be elucidated in the r esear ch) (77).
•  Glycogen stores should be replenished  after exercise and before the next bout of training. A
regular diet with sufficient carboh ydrate intake can restore glycogen over the course of a 24-hour
period. For faster glycogen synthesis , athletes should eat or drink a high-carboh ydrate meal
immediately after exercise and at regular interv als thereafter . This is especial ly important for
athletes who tr ain again less than 24 hours after their ini tial training session (61).
Nutrition for Strength
637
•  Athletes should consider supplementin g with carboh ydrate before and during competi tion to
maintain strength and minimiz e muscle breakdown (47). In gener al, strength or speed athletes
should consume 5 to 6 grams of carbohydrate per kilogram body weight per day during peak
training periods. As little as 30 grams of carboh ydrate after training may reduce muscle breakdown.
The ideal time period for carboh ydrate consumption after resistance training has yet to be fully
clarified; however, consuming carboh ydrate sooner (rather than waiting) may be more beneficial,
particularly i f training w as carried out in a f asted state (43).
•  Because low glycogen can impair muscle force, athletes should consume higher -energy
carboh ydrates imme diately following weightl ifting or strength and power competitions if they must
compete or train again over the course of the 24-hour period after their initial competi tion.
Otherwise, they can consume enough carboh ydrate over the course of the day to restore glycogen
levels bef ore the next bout of tr aining or competi tion (47 , 104).
•  In gener al, strength or speed athletes should consume 1.4 to 2.0 grams of protein per
kilogram body weight per day, even if their sport or training includes an aerobic endur ance
component. After resistance training, younger individuals should consume at least 20 to 50 grams
(providing about 8.5 to 20 grams of essential amino acids) of a high-qual ity, high-leucine protein
(2-3 g), while older adults should consume 40 grams or more to maximal ly stimulate muscle
protein synthesis in the acute time period after training (109). If the exercise was performed in a
fasted state (first thing in the morning  or more than 3 hours after the last protein-rich meal), the
protein should be consumed within 30 minutes after the end of the session; but if the exercise was
performed in a fed state (preexercise protein-rich meal or supplement), this postex ercise time
window ma y be consider ably longer (10).
•  Between 30 and 100 grams of high-en ergy carboh ydrates should be consumed after muscle-
damaging ex ercise to r educe muscle pr otein br eakdown (18, 43).
•  Adult athletes should eat meals containing at least 20 to 30 gr ams of a higher -leucine pr otein.
Nutrition for Hypertrophy
•  Ingestion of between 30 and 100 grams of energy-dense, moder ate to high glycemic index
carboh ydrates may be consumed after muscle-damaging exercise to help reduce muscle protein
breakdown (18, 43).
•  After resistance training, younger individuals should consume at least 20 to 50 grams
(providing about 8.5 to 20 grams of essential amino acids) of a high-qual ity, high-leucine protein
(>2-3 g), while older adults should consume 40 grams or more to maximal ly stimulate muscle
protein synthesis in the acute time period after tr aining (109).
•  Adult athletes should eat meals containing at least 20 to 40 grams of a higher -leucine protein
every 3 to 4 hours.
Nutrition for Muscular Endurance
•  Maintain adequate h ydration b y preventing w ater weight losses ex ceeding 2% of body weight.
•  During prolonged training or competi tion, consider a carboh ydrate-electr olyte beverage to
delay fatigue and impr ove perf ormance, particularly i f perf orming after an o vernight f ast (6, 142).
•  Fully replace gly cogen stor es bef ore the next tr aining session or competi tion.
•  Consume pr otein after tr aining or games to minimiz e muscle damage and sor eness (42).
TABLE 11.3  Sport-Specific Protein Needs
638
SportDaily protein
needs in grams
per kilogram
body weightSample daily
protein intakePostexercise protein
needsPostexercise
protein examples
Low to
moder ate
aerobic
endur ance
activity (e.g. ,
jogging,
triathlon)1.4-1.8 150 lb (68 kg)
individual:
1 cup (240 g)
higher -protein
Greek y ogurt
(18-22 g
protein)
Grilled chick en
sandwich (28 g
protein)
Spaghet ti with 4
oz (113 g)
meatbal ls (20 g
protein)
Salmon (6 oz
[170 g]) (34 g
protein)0.2-0.5 g per ki logram
body weight1 higher -protein
nutrition bar (20 g
protein)
1 cup (240 g)
higher -protein
Greek y ogurt (18-
22 g pr otein)
Elite aer obic
endur ance
athlete or one
who tr ains
intensely>1.6 140 lb (64 kg)
individual:
1 cup (240 g)
higher -protein
Greek y ogurt
(18-22 g
protein)
Grilled chick en
sandwich (28 g
protein)
Spaghet ti with 6
oz (170 g)
meatbal ls (30 g
protein)
95% lean beef
(4 oz [113 g])
(30 g pr otein)
1/2 cup low -fat
cottage cheese
(12 g pr otein)0.2-0.5 g per ki logram
body weight20 fl oz (591 mL)
1% mi lk or
higher -protein so y
milk (20 g
protein)
1 scoop whey
protein (20-25 g
protein)
American
footbal l1.6-2.2, though
likely at the
upper end of this
range f or those
playing at an
intense lev el240 lb (109 kg)
individual:
5 large eggs (30
g protein)
Roast beef
sandwich (28 g
protein)
8 oz (227 g)
grilled salmonNot clari fied b y resear ch;
therefore, athletes ma y
want to f ollow the
guidel ines f or resistance
training and consume a
minimum of 30 g of a
fast, high-qual ity,
leucine-rich (2-3 g
leucine) pr oteinTofu and berry
shake (1/2 cup
[125 g] tof u, 1
scoop so y protein
powder , 1/2 cup
[75 g] mix ed
berries) (23 g
protein)
639
SportDaily protein
needs in grams
per kilogram
body weightSample daily
protein intakePostexercise protein
needsPostexercise
protein examples
(45 g pr otein)
6 oz (170 g)
chicken thighs
with 1 cup (185
g) cook ed
quinoa (50 g
protein)
1 cup (240 g)
higher -protein
Greek y ogurt
(18-22 g
protein)
12 fl oz (355
mL) 1% mi lk
with 1 scoop
whey pr otein
(34 g pr otein)1 scoop whey
protein wi th 4
tbsp (32 g)
powder ed peanut
butter (38 g
protein)
Gymnastics Dietary r estriction
increases pr otein
needs up to 2.2
(if they r estrict
calories); no
studies
conducted on
gymnasts’ pr otein
needs105 lb (48 kg)
individual:
3 large egg
omelet wi th 1 oz
(28 g) cheese
(25 g pr otein)
5.3 oz (150 g)
Greek y ogurt
with 1 oz (28 g)
almonds and
1/2 cup (75 g)
berries (18 g
protein)
Chicken
shawarma wr ap
(4 oz [113 g]
grilled chick en,
1 whole wheat
pita, 2 tbsp [30
g] hummus [37
g protein])
3 oz (85 g)
shrimp wi th 1/2
cup (85 g) black
beans (29 g
protein)0.2-0.5 g per ki logram
body weight1 cup (210 g) low -
fat cot tage cheese
with 1/2 cup (75
g) pineapple
chunks (25 g
protein)
2 scoops (60 g)
plant-based
protein powder , 1
cup (237 mL)
almond mi lk, 1
tbsp (15 g) chia
seeds (28 g
protein)
Team sports Likely 1.6-2.0 g,
depending on the
sport and165 lb (75 kg)
individual:
Follow the sample
daily meal plan f or~0.2-0.5 g per kg per
hour (minimum of 20 g)1 scoop of whey
protein in 8 fl oz
(237 mL) skim
640
SportDaily protein
needs in grams
per kilogram
body weightSample daily
protein intakePostexercise protein
needsPostexercise
protein examples
intensi ty of
exercisethe el ite aer obic
endur ance athlete
above and add
5 oz (142 g)
chicken thighs
with 1 cup (185
g) cook ed
quinoa (43 g
protein)milk (30 g
protein)
Weightl ifting 1.6-2.0 212 lb (96 kg)
individual:
4 large eggs
omelet wi th 1 oz
(28 g) cheese
(30 g pr otein)
6 oz (170 g)
grilled salmon
with 1 cup (185
g) cook ed
quinoa (42 g
protein)
6 oz (170 g)
sirloin steak (46
g protein)
6 oz (170 g)
shrimp , 1/2 cup
(85 g) black
beans, 2 soft
taco siz e whole
grain torti llas
(58 g pr otein)Studies ha ve used 20-70
g protein in close
tempor al proximity to
resistance ex ercise,
though a pr otein
containing appr oximately
2-3 g leucine per serving
of protein is
recommended1 scoop egg or
whey pr otein (or 2
scoops plant -
based pr otein)
with 4 tbsp (32 g)
powder ed peanut
butter (38 g
protein)
Wrestling 2.2, though
dietary r estriction
increases pr otein
needs190 lb (86 kg)
individual:
Follow the sample
daily meal plan f or
the weightl ifter, but
add the f ollowing:
1 cup (210 g)
low-fat cot tage
cheese, 1/2 cup
(75 g) pineapple
chunks (25 g
protein)0.2-0.5 g per ki logram
(minimum of 20 g of
high-qual ity protein)1 scoop of whey
protein in 8 fl oz
(237 mL) skim
milk (28 g
protein) or 2
scoops of whey
protein in w ater
(30-44 g pr otein)
641
Nutrition Strategies for Altering Body
Composition
Athletes who want to alter their body composi tion typical ly need to gain muscle,
lose body fat, or both. Although there are some scenarios (typical ly in those with
eating disorders) in which an athlete may need to gain both muscle and fat, this
section f ocuses on gaining muscle and losing body f at.
The first step toward altering body composi tion involves estimating calorie
needs (though calorie  is the commo n term, the technical term is kilocalorie ).
The number of calories an athlete needs each day depends on a number of
factors includin g genetics, body weight, body composi tion, training program, and
age. Chi ldren and adolescents also need calories f or growth and dev elopment.
Basal metabolic rate (BMR ) is by far the largest contributor to total energy
expendi ture, accounting for approximately 65% to 70% of daily energy
expendi ture (63, 114). It is a measur e of the calories required for maintaining
normal body functions such as respiration, blood circulatio n, and gastrointestinal
and renal processing. Basal metabol ic rate and resting metabolic rate (RMR)
are often used interchang eably, though they are slightly different. Basal
metabol ic rate is measur ed after an overnight fast (12-14 h without food) with
the subject resting supine and motionless but awake (2, 40). Resting metabol ic
rate is often used instead of BMR due to the ease of measur ement (an overnight
fast is not required), yet it is 10% to 20% higher than BMR due to increased
energy expen diture resulting from recent food intake or physical activity
completed earlier in the day. Several factors influence BMR and RMR, particularly
fat-free mass, which explain s approximately 70% to 80% of the difference in
RMR among individuals (93, 115, 138). Other factors include age, nutrition
status, genetics, and differences in endocrine functioning (such as hypo- or
hyperth yroidism).
The second-lar gest component of an individual’ s energy requirement is the
energy expended in physical activity. Of all the components, it is the most
variable among individuals. The number of calories expended through physical
activity increases with the frequency , intensi ty, and duration of the training
program, as well as nontraining daily activity (e.g., washing a car or doing
housework). Typical ly, 20% to 30% of total daily energy expendi ture is from
physical activity, though this figure may be consider ably higher in athletes (63,
114). The highest energy costs are seen in aerobic activities performed by large
athletes for long periods of time, whereas the lowest energy costs are associated
with ski ll and power sports perf ormed b y smal ler athletes.
642
The thermic effect of food, also known as diet-induced thermogene sis, is
the increase in energy expendi ture above the RMR that can be measur ed for
several hours following a meal. The thermic effect of food includes the energy
cost of digestio n, absorption,  metabol ism, and storage of food in the body. The
thermic effect of food accounts for approximately 10% to 15% of total calories
burned each da y (63, 114).
Many different equations can be used to calculate calorie needs, including the
Cunningham equation and equations by the Institute of Medicine (IOM), which
are prediction equations. The various IOM equations take sex, body weight,
height, age, and physical activity levels into account to predict the estimated
energy requirement (EER) (138). RMR can then be multiplied by an activity
factor from 1.2 (sedentary) to 1.9 (heavy physical activity) to predict energy
requirements (50). Howev er, these equations do not take into account how
muscle mass affects RMR (90). The Cunningham equation takes fat-free mass
(FFM) into ac count to estimate RMR, making i t mor e appl icable to athletes (135).
RMR = 500 + 22 (FFM in kg)
After using the Cunningham equation to estimate RMR based on FFM, an activity
factor can be used to estimat e total daily energy expendi ture. Instead of using a
basic activity factor, the strength and condi tioning professional may choose to
use metabol ic equiv alents (MET values), an estimate of caloric expendi ture
during activity. One MET is the energy equiv alent of sitting quietly; therefore, the
greater the intensi ty of ex ercise, the higher the MET v alue (5).
Another , more laborious method that can be used by very motiv ated athletes
is to record dietary intake for a minimum of three consecutiv e, representativ e
days during a period of stable body weight. The individual’ s daily energy
requirement is assumed to equal the average number of calories consumed each
day. The pitfall of this metho d is that recording food intake usually alters normal
eating habits and people do not always accurately record their food intake (55,
121). Finally, a very simple method for quickly assessing calorie needs is
presented in table 11.4  (24).
Weight Gain
An athlete’s ability to gain weight depends on numer ous factors; the ones that
can be controlled include diet and training. The off-season should be used as a
time to make dietary changes that focus on weight gain since athletes do not
have the pr essures of competi tion on their mind.
If athletes increase their calorie intake dramatical ly and consistently , they
could gain more fat than they would like. A gener al guideline, which should be
adjusted based on the athlete, is to consume approximately 500 additional
calories per day in order to gain weight (113). Eating  larger portion sizes,
643
increasing meal frequency , and focusing on choosing calorie-dense foods are all
strategies that can help an athlete gain weight. In addition to increasing total
calorie intake, athletes should ensur e that they are eating enough protein to
maximiz e gains in lean body mass: 1.6 to 2.2 grams per kilogram body weight
per day. Increasing an athlete’ s protein intake may make weight gain tough,
given the profound effect that protein has on satiet y, as well as the increased
thermic effect of feeding associated with higher -protein diets. Howev er,
overfeeding protein is advantageous if the athlete can sustain the diet. In a
randomiz ed, controlled overfeeding study, 16 healthy adults lived in a metabol ic
ward for eight weeks and were overfed a diet contain ing low (5% of total
calories), normal (15% of total calories), or high (25% of total calories) protein.
The subjects who consum ed the normal- and high-pr otein diet stored
approximately 45% of the excess calories as lean body mass, whereas those on
the low-protein diet stored 95% of the excess calories consumed as body fat
(20). In addition to making dietary changes, athletes who want to gain weight
should consider supplementing with creatine monoh ydrate, a supplement that
safely and ef fectively incr eases lean body weight (73).
TABLE 11.4  Physical Activity Level Values and Activity
Coefficients
Physical activity
level (PAL)* ExamplesPhysical activity coefficient
(males/females)
Sedentary ( ≥1.0 to
<1.4)Common activi ties of dai ly living (ADLs) 1.00/1.00
Low activ e (≥1.4 to
<1.6)ADLs and 30-60 min of dai ly moder ate activi ty 1.11/1.12
Active (≥1.6 to
<1.9)ADLs and  ≥1 h of dai ly moder ate activi ty 1.25/1.27
Very activ e (≥1.9 to
<2.5)ADLs and  ≥ 1 h of dai ly moder ate activi ty and 1
more h of vigor ous activi ty or 2 h of moder ate
activity1.48/1.45
*PAL = ratio of energy expendi ture to basal daily energy expendi ture (“1.0” means total energy expendi ture
equals basal dai ly ener gy expendi ture).
Reprinted by permission from L.M. Burke and E.S. Rawson, “Fueling and Nutrition,” in NSCA ’s Essentials of
Sport Science, edited for the National Strength and Condi tioning Association by D.N. French and L. Torres
Ronda (Human Kinetics, 2022), 366.
Finally, though  athletes may know their energy and protein needs, putting this
knowledge into practice can be perplexing. Therefore, regular nutrition
counsel ing (or coaching) by a sports dietitian or sports nutritionist with an
advanced degree is a recommended strategy for facilitating greater weight gain.
644
A study of 21 elite athletes with heavy training loads, who were randomiz ed to
receive nutrition counsel ing or to eat ad libitum, showed that over the course of
the 8- to 12-week weight gain period, the group receiving dietary counsel ing had
greater total and lean body mass gains during the intervention and after 12
months; this means that the group receiving nutrition counsel ing continued to
benefi t from the nutrition guidance for several months after counsel ing ended
(41).
Weight (Fat) Loss
Athletes partici pating in a variety of sports may need to lose body fat to improve
aspects of performance such as speed or aerobic endurance. Plus, regulating
body weight may give certain athletes a mental advantage going into
competi tion (108). Additional ly, maintaining or making weight is a recurring
aspect of sports that include weight classes, weight limitations, or judging based
on appear ance such as weightlifting, wrestling, boxing, lightweight crew, and
gymnastics.
Despi te diet books on the bestseller lists, there is no ideal diet that works for
everyone. Instead, studies show that a variety of types of diets, including low-
carboh ydrate and low-fat diets, result in weight loss as long as the people
following them are consumin g fewer calories than needed to maintain weight.
Additional ly, there appears to be no difference between the amount of weight
loss on a low-carboh ydrate as compar ed to a low-fat (and therefore higher -
carboh ydrate) diet (19, 39). Total calorie intake and dietary adher ence, the
ability to stick with a diet over time, are the two most important factors that
predict successful weight loss. Howev er, a good portion of weight loss during
dieting may come from muscle (144). Further , because muscle protein synthesis
is an energy-expensiv e process, during times of dieting caloric restriction may
decrease muscle protein synthesis. Athletes who want to maintain muscle and
lose body fat while dieting should consume about 1.8 to 2.7 grams protein per
kilogram body weight per day (or approximately 2.3-3.1 g protein per kilogram
fat-free mass per day) in addition to maintaining a moderate energy deficit of
approximately 500 calories per da y (91).
There is no one ideal diet. Instead, athletes need to choose a
dietary approach based on whether it is safe for them, contains
enough prote in to meet their needs, and fits their lifestyle so that
they can easily adhere to it.
To be sustainable in the long term, diets should be individual ized; be easy to
adher e to; and take into account lifestyle habits, medical history (including
645