# Section 12.1

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 12: Performance-Enhancing Substances and Methods

**Section:** 12.1 -- Types of Performance-Enhancing Substances

**PDF Pages:** 659--680

CHAPTER  12
PERFORMANCE-ENHANCING
SUBSTANCES AND METHODS
Bill I. Campbell, PhD, and Nathaniel D.M.
Jenkins, PhD
The authors would like to acknowledge the significant contributions of Jay R. Hoffman
and Jef frey R. Stout to this chapter .
After completing this chapter, you will be able to
provide r eliable and up-to-date inf ormation to athletes on the
risks and benefi ts of perf ormance-enhancing substances,
including anabol ic ster oids, selectiv e andr ogen r eceptor
modulators, and peptides;
understand the ef ficacy and adv erse ef fects of o ver-the-counter
dietary supplements mark eted to athletes f or enhancing sport
and ex ercise perf ormance;
determine which perf ormance-enhancing supplements ar e
beneficial f or str ength and power perf ormance, aer obic
endur ance perf ormance, or both; and
distinguish between those perf ormance-enhancing supplements
that mimic the ef fects of hormones in the body and those that
improve perf ormance thr ough some other means.
659
Athletes who choose to use performance-enhancing substances do
so with the hope that they will augment their training adaptations
and ultimately improve their sport performance (181). Ideally,
performance-enhancing substances also support the health of the
athlete and are within the ethical and stated guidel ines of the
athlete’ s sport. Because of the ethical consider ations relating to
unfair advantage during competi tion and the potential for adverse
events, most athletic governing bodies have gener ated a list of
substances that are banned from national and international
competi tion. Athletes caught using such substances can be
suspended or forced to forfeit their medals or both. In situations in
which the athlete tests positive for a banned substance on repeated
occasions, he or she risks a lifetime ban on participation in the given
sport. Howev er, numer ous nutritional supplements and ergogenic
aids are permissible and are frequently used by athletes to maximiz e
performance enhancement. Often the use of these substances is
promoted on the basis of unfounded claims (181). Another concern
that athletes need to be aware of with the use of dietary
supplements is the risk of unintended doping originating from
contaminated products. The presence of undeclar ed compounds in
the composition of dietary supplements is a serious concern (131).
Thus, it is imper ative that the athlete become informed about the
legality of these substances, understand the potential risks
associated with consumption, and know whether scienti fic resear ch
supports the claims (i.e., the efficacy of the product). The strength
and condi tioning professional can greatly assist athletes in this
regard by giving them relevant information related to these issues,
as well as by referring them to nutrition special ists. Although an
ergogenic aid can be any substance, mechanical aid, or training
method that improves sport performance, for the purposes of this
chapter the term r efers speci fically to pharmacologic aids.
Athletes may try to gain a competi tive advantage by using
supplements that are repute d to be ergogenic but are not banned,
or they may knowingly use banned substances in the belief that they
660
can stay ahead of the drug testers (181). A consequen ce may be
that athletes who would normal ly refrain from using these
substances may feel pressured to use them just to stay abreast of
their competi tors. Howev er, athletes who are well informed can
confidently ignore useless and possibly harmf ul products despite
what their fellow athletes claim. It may also be possib le to steer
athletes away from the use of banned drugs if they are aware of the
risks to their health and safety and are aware that compe titors who
cheat run a high risk of being detected.
Athletes should focus on using appropriately periodiz ed strength
and conditioning methods and sound nutritional practices designed
to enhance performance. If these two factors are addressed, at that
point the athlete can consider using sport supplements or ergogenic
aids. It is important that athletes seek guidance from appropriate
professionals to make sure that what they are considering is both
legal and ef ficacious.
An athlete’s first priority should be to apply sound
principles of training, including adequate nutrition,
before using  any nutritional supplement or ergo genic
aid. Before purchasing or consuming a product, an
athlete should seek guidance from qualified
professionals to make sure the choice is legal, safe, and
effective.
661
Types of Performance-Enhancing
Substances
This chapter discusses two categories of performance-enhancing
substances: hormones and the drugs that mimic their effects and
dietary supplements. Certain hormones, such as testoster one, play
an integr al role in the adaptiv e response to strength and
condi tioning activities; others, such as epinephrine, are important for
energy mobilization during training. These and several other types of
hormones are covered more extensiv ely in the next part of this
chapter . The distinction between a performance-enhancing drug and
a dietary supplement is not intuitively obvious. For example,
caffeine, which is found in many beverages such as coffee, is
categoriz ed as a drug. The distinction between a drug and a dietary
supplement affects whether a product meets United States Food and
Drug Administr ation (FDA) approval for safety and effectiveness. If a
product is not classified as a drug or advertised as having
therapeutic value, FDA regulations concerning its sale are relatively
relaxed. This means that any manuf acturer can introduce a new
dietary supplem ent to the market without special approval and that
the FDA will not investigate its safety or effectiveness unless a health
risk is brought to the agency ’s attention (76). The FDA’s definition of
a drug encompasses substan ces that change the body’s structur e or
function. This includes substances that stimulate hormone  secretion.
Additional ly, if a compound is administer ed differently from the way
in which f oods would be consumed, i t may be classi fied as a drug.
The distinction between a drug and a dietary
supplement is linked to FDA approval for safety and
effectiveness.
Gener ally, dietary suppl ements  are highly refined products that
should not be confused with a food. They may not have any positive
662
nutritional value; hence they are not referred to as nutritional
supplements . Carboh ydrate loading to bolster glycogen stores before
an athletic competi tion is consider ed sport nutrition, as is a tablet of
a single purified amino acid (not promoted for medicinal properties);
howev er, the tablet is consider ed a dietary supplement.
The FDA regulates both finished dietary supplement products and
dietary ingredients. Dietary supplements are regulated under a
different set of regulations than those covering conventional foods
and drugs (see FDA websi te at www.fda.gov/Food
/Dietarysupplements /default.htm). In 1994, the U.S. Congr ess
passed a seminal piece of legislation known as the Dietary
Supplement Health and Education Act (DSHEA). Under DSHEA,
manuf acturers and distributors of dietary supplements are prohibited
from marketing products that are adulterated or misbr anded. This
means that these firms are responsible for evaluating the safety and
labeling of their products before marketing to ensur e that they meet
all the requirements of DSHEA and FDA regulations. Companies can,
howev er, make claims about effects on the body’s structur e and
function as long as the manuf acturers can show that the statements
are truthful and not misleading; this is a much less stringent
requirement than f or effectiveness claims made f or drugs.
Definition of Products That Can Be Sold as
Dietary Supplements
The following points define which products can be sold as dietary suppleme nts in
the Uni ted States:
A product (other than tobac co) intended to supplement the diet that contains
one or mor e of the f ollowing dietary ingr edients:
A vitamin
A miner al
An herb or other botanical
An amino acid
A dietary substance for use by humans to supplement the diet by
increasing the total dietary intak e
663
A concentr ate, metabol ite, consti tuent, extract, or combination of any
ingredient l isted abo ve
The product must also be labeled as a dietary supplement, such that the
label must include the term dietary supplement  or equivalent and therefore
cannot also be advertised for use as a conventional food or as the sole item
within a meal or diet.
Ergogenic substances are usually banned from athletic
competi tion when a consensus is reached that they may provide an
unfair competi tive edge or pose a significant health risk. This
prohibition does not need to be based on conclusiv e proof that a
substance does anything advantageous; it simply represents an
agreement among administr ators or clinicians that this may be the
case. As mentioned previously , every sport’s governing body
publishes its own list of banned substances. Probably  the most
widely recogniz ed international organization regulatin g doping
worldwide is the World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA), which oversees
the doping controls and establ ishes the banned substances list for
the International Olympic Commi ttee (61). Each country has an
affiliated agency (e.g., United States Anti-Doping Agency  [USADA],
United Kingdom Anti-Doping [UKAD], and Sport Integri ty Australia
[SIA]) that oversees anti-doping controls for Olympic sports.
Additional ly, in some countries these organizations also oversee
doping controls for professional sports (i.e., UKAD and SIA). The
prohibited substances list is standar dized and updated by WADA
each year. While the WADA list is the international standar d, other
organizations, such as collegiate and professional sports in the
United States, have different prohibited substances lists as well as
penal ties for doping. Regardless of which organization  regulates
doping controls, it is incumbent upon the athlete, sport coach,
strength and condi tioning professional, and all support staff to
ensur e that they are compl iant with their respectiv e organization’ s
anti-doping policies. Figure 12.1 lists the National Collegiate Athletic
Association banned drug classes (updated in 2023). This list is used
by many universities in the United States and is subject to change
664
on a yearly basis. Check with your institution or governing body for
the list speci fic to y our si tuation.
Some of the substances are illegal under governmental statute as
well. For example, in the United States anabol ic steroids are a Class
III substance, which makes their possession, for other than medical
use, punishable with a maximum penal ty of one year in prison and a
minimum US$1,000 fine if this is the individual’ s first drug offense.
The maximum penal ty for trafficking (to deal or trade in something
illegal) is no more than a 10-year prison sentence and a fine of no
more than US$500,000 if this is the individual’ s first felony drug
offense. If this is the second felony drug offense, the maximum
period of imprisonment and the maximum fine both double. While
these penal ties are for federal offenses, individual states have also
implemented fines and penal ties for illegal use of anabol ic ster oids.
665
Hormones
A variety of endogenously produced hormones are used to enhance
athletic performance. The most commonly used hormone is
testosterone , along with its synth etic derivatives (115).
Testoster one is the primary androgen hormone that interacts with
skeletal muscle tissue. In addition to testoster one, a variety of other
hormones produced by the body have been emplo yed by athletes as
ergogenic aids to stimulate the testes to produce testos terone, or
they have anabol ic propertie s in themselv es; growth hormone is an
example. Erythr opoietin, which is secreted by the kidneys,  is used to
stimulate red cell production for enhancement of aerobic endur ance
performance, and catecholamines such as adrenaline (or
epinephrine), which have metabol ic and nervous system effects, are
often used to enhance weigh t loss and to provide greater arousal for
performance.
Anabolic Steroids
Anabolic steroids  are the synthetic (human-made) derivatives of
the male sex hormone testoster one. Physiological ly, elevations in
testoster one concentr ations stimulate protein synthesis, resulting in
improvements in muscle size, body mass, and strength (25).
Additional ly, testoster one and its synthetic derivatives are
responsible for the development and matur ation of male secondary
sex characteristics (i.e., increase in body hair; mascul ine voice;
development of male pattern baldness, libido, sperm production, and
aggressiveness). These androgenic  properties include the full
development of the primary sexual characteristics of the male. Thus
it is more accurate to refer to synthetic derivatives of testoster one as
anabol ic-androgenic steroids. Howev er, they are also referred to as
androgens , androgenic ster oids, or anabol ic ster oids.
Figure 12.1 National Collegiate Athletic
666
Association banned drug classes.
A. Stimulants
Amphetamine (Adderall), Caffeine (Guar ana), Cocaine, Dimeth ylbutylamine
(DMBA; AMP), Dimethylhexylamine (DMHA; Octodrine), Ephedrine, Heptam inol,
Hordenine, Lisdexamf etamine (Vyvanse), Methamphetamine, Methylhexanamine
(DMAA; Forthane), Methylphenidate (Ritalin), Mephedr one (bath salts), Modafini l,
Octopamine, Pheneth ylamine (PEAs) and its derivatives, Phentermine, Synephrine
(bitter or ange).
Exceptions : Phen ylephrine and Pseudoephedrine ar e not banned.
B. Anabolic Agents
Androstenedione, Boldenone, Clenbuter ol, Clostebol, DHCMT (Oral Turinabol),
DHEA, Drostanolone, Epitrenbolone, Etiocholanolone, Methandienone,
Methaster one, Nandrolone (19-nortestoster one), Oxandr olone, SARMS [Ligandrol
(LGD-4033); Ostar ine; RAD140; S-23], Stanoz olol, Stenbolone, Testoste rone,
Trenbolone.
C. Beta-Blockers (Banned for Rifle Only)
Atenolol, Metopr olol, Nadolol, Pindolol, Pr opranolol, Timolol.
D. Diuretics and Masking Agents
Bumetanide, Canrenone (Spironolactone), Chlorothiazide, Furosemide,
Hydrochlor othiazide, Pr obenecid, T riamter ene, T richlormethiazide.
Exceptions : Finasteride is not banned.
E. Narcotics
Buprenorphine, Dextr omoramide, Diamorphine (heroin), Fentan yl and its
derivatives, Hydrocodone, Hydromorphone, Meperidine, Methadone, Morphine,
Nicomorphine, Oxy codone, Oxymorphone, P entaz ocine, T ramadol.
F. Peptide Hormones, Growth Factors, Related
Substances, and Mimetics
Growth hormone (hGH), Human Chorionic Gonadotr opin (hCG), Erythr opoietin
(EPO), IGF-1 (colostrum; deer antler v elvet), Ibutamor en (MK -677).
Exceptions : Insulin, Synthroid and F orteo ar e not banned.
G. Hormone and Metabolic Modulators
Anti-Estr ogen (Fulvestrant), Aromatas e Inhibitors [Anastr ozole (Arimidex);  ATD
(andr ostatrienedione); Formestane; Letrozole], PPAR-d [GW1516 (Cardarine);
667
GW0742], SERMS [Clomiphene (Clomid); Raloxifene (Evista); Tamoxifen
(Nolvadex)].
H. Beta-2 Agonists
Albuter ol, Formoter ol, Higenamine, Salbutamol, Salmeter ol, Vilanter ol.
Note: The banned substance l ist on NCAA.or g is updated annual ly; readers
should check the websi te for a r ecent update. Also , the l ist is not exhaustiv e
and only r epresents some of the banned substances wi thin a particular drug
class. An y substance that is chemical ly/pharmacological ly related to one of the
above drug classes, ev en if it is not l isted as an example, is also banned.
Information about ingr edients in medications and nutri tional/dietary
supplements can be obtained b y contacting AXIS at 816-474-7321 or
axis.drugf reesport.com .
There is no complete l ist of banned substances. Do not r ely on this l ist to rule
out an y label ingr edient. Man y nutri tional/dietary supplements ar e contaminated
with banned substances not l isted on the label. It is the student -athlete’ s
responsibi lity to check wi th the appr opriate athletics staf f before using an y
substance.
Reprinted b y permission f rom National Col legiate A thletic Association, “2025-26
NCAA B anned Substances, ” last modi fied June 2025,  https:// ncaaor g.s3
.amaz onaws.com/ssi/substance /2025 -26/2025 -26NCAA _BannedSubstances .pdf.
Secretion of testoster one occurs primari ly in the intersti tial Leydig
cells in the testes. Although  several other steroid hormones with
anabol ic-androgenic properti es are produced in the testes (e.g.,
dihydrotestoster one and androstenedione), testoster one is produced
in far greater quanti ties. Testoster one and these other male sex
hormones are also secreted in significantly smaller amoun ts from the
adrenal glands (in men and women) and ovaries (in women). Many
of the ergogenic aids on the market today are precursors for
testoster one (i.e., androstenedione) and are discussed in more detail
later in this chapter .
Major Sport Organizations’ Lists of Banned
Substances
Major League Baseball
668
https:// img.mlbstatic .com/mlb-images /image /upload /mlb
/oqj0ztqx efst9pmkpbcl .pdf
Major League Soccer
https:// democr ats-judiciary .house .gov/sites/democr ats.judiciary .house .gov
/files/mlsconsti tution _0.pdf
National Collegiate Athletic Association
https:// ncaaor g.s3.amaz onaws.com/ssi/substance /2024 -25/2024 -25NCAA
_BannedSubstances .pdf
National Football League
https:// nflpaweb.blob.core.windows .net/websi te/PDFs /List-of-Prohibited-
Substances _PES_2022 .pdf
National Hockey League
Consistent wi th World Anti-Doping Agency (W ADA) f or both in-competi tion
and out -of-competi tion testing
USA Lacrosse
Consistent wi th WADA f or both in-competi tion and out -of-competi tion testing
www.usalacr osse.com/sites/default/files/documents /Safety/2021 -World-
Lacrosse-Anti-Doping -Code -Final .pdf
USA Powerlifting
Consistent wi th WADA f or both in-competi tion and out -of-competi tion testing,
with the ex ception that US A Powerl ifting does not enf orce
www.usapowerl ifting.com/usa-powerl ifting-anti-doping -rules /
US Tennis Association
Consistent wi th WADA f or both in-competi tion and out -of-competi tion testing
and the T ennis Anti-Doping Pr ogram
www.usta.com/en/home /about -usta/who-we-are/national /tennis -anti-doping -
-what-you-need -to-know .html#tab =tennisanti -dopingpr ogramme
World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA)
www.wada-ama.org/en/resour ces/world -anti-doping -code -and-international -
standar ds/prohibited-list
It was not until the 1930s that testoster one was isolated,
synthesiz ed, and subsequently investigated for its effects in humans
(24). The physiological changes that testoster one regulates have
made it one of the drugs of choice for strength and power athletes
or other athletes interested in increasing muscle mass (115).
Howev er, testoster one itself is a very poor ergogenic aid. Rapid
degradation occurs when testoster one is given either orally or
669
through injecta ble administr ation (24). Thus, chemical modification
of testoster one was necessa ry to slow the degradation process in
order to achiev e androgenic and anabol ic effects at lower
concentr ations and to provide effective blood concent rations for
longer periods of time (24). Many derivatives of testoster one were
developed from 1940 to 1960 (186); once these modifications
occurred, anabol ic steroid use through either oral or injectable
administr ation became possible. In recent years, anabo lic steroid
administr ation via creams and gels for topical applications and skin
patches has increased in populari ty, primari ly for medical reasons.
Howev er, the most commonly used forms for administr ation in
athletes are oral and injecta ble forms (115). Examples of oral and
injectable anabol ic ster oids ar e listed in table 12.1 .
Dosing
Athletes typically use anabol ic steroids in a stacking  regimen, in
which they administer several different drugs simultaneously (167).
The rationale for stacking is to increase the potency of each drug via
an additive effect. That is, the potency of one anabol ic agent may be
enhanced when it is consumed simultaneously with another anabol ic
agent. Resear ch in this area is limited, and the efficacy of stacking
has not been proven one way or the other. Individuals use both oral
and injectable compounds. Most users take anabol ic steroids in a
cyclic pattern, meaning they use the drugs for several weeks or
months and alternate these cycles with periods of discontinued use
(167). Often users administer the drugs in a pyramid (step-up)
pattern in which dosages are steadi ly increased over several weeks
(115). Toward the end of the cycle, the athlete “steps down” to
reduce the likelihood of negativ e side effects. At this point, some
athletes discontinue the drug use or perhaps initiate another cycle of
different drugs (e.g., drugs that may increase endogenous
testoster one production, taken to prevent the undesir able drop in
testoster one concentr ations that follows the removal of the
pharmaceutical agents). One study showed that the typical steroid
670
regimen involved an average of 3.1 agents, with a typical cycle
ranging from 5 to 10 weeks (167). The dose that the athlete
administer ed was reported to vary from between 5 and 29 times
greater than physiological replacement doses (167). These higher
pharmacologic dosages appear necessary to elicit the gains that the
athletes desire. In a classic study on the dose–r esponse curve of
anabol ic steroids, Forbes (68) demonstr ated that the total dose of
anabol ic steroids has a logarithmic relationship to increases in lean
body mass; low doses produce only slight effects, but there is a
progressive augmentation of lean body mass with increasingly larger
doses. These results reinforce the athlete’ s philosoph y that if a low
dose is ef fective, mor e must be bet ter.
TABLE 12.1  Generic and Trade Names of Anabolic
Steroids Commonly Used by Athletes
Category and generic name Example trade names
ORALLY ACTIVE STEROIDS
Danaz ol Danocrine
Ethylestr enol Maxibol in
Fluoxymester one Halotestin
Ultandren
Android-F
Mester olone Proviron
Mestr anum
Methandr ostenolone Dianabol
Methyltestoster one Metandr en
Oreton meth yl
Android
Testered
Virolin
Oxandr olone Anavar
*These are generic categories of substances; many different preparations of each are
available.
671
Category and generic name Example trade names
Oxandrin
Oxymetholone Anadr ol-50
Stanoz olol Winstr ol
INJECTABLE STEROIDS
Boldenone undecylenate Equipoise
Parenabol
Dromostanolone Drolban
Methenolone enanthate Primobolan depot
Nandr olone esters* Deca-dur abolin
Durabolin
Dynabolan
Anabol
Testoster one esters* Andriol
Delatestryl
Depo-testoster one
Oreton
Restandol
Sustanon
Trenbolone acetate Finaject
Prabolan
TRANSDERMAL OR TOPICAL STEROIDS
Testoster one Androderm
Androgen
Testim
Testoderm
*These are generic categories of substances; many different preparations of each are
available.
Athletes typically use higher doses of the substances than are
prescribed for men with low testoster one levels. Methandr ostenolone
(Dianabol), for example, maintains normal secondary sexual
characteristics in hypogonadal men at a replacement dose of
672
approximately 15 milligrams per day; athletes have reported using
up to 300 milligrams per day (77). This orally active drug has not
been available for medical use in the United States for several
decades but is still available through black market sources.
Testoster one enanthate is a testoster one ester and is an injectable
steroid that is readily available in the United States and is used
clinically for some rare diseases and for replacement treatment. A
replacement dose is approximately 75 to 100 milligrams per week
administer ed every one to two weeks. Injectable steroids are
administer ed intramuscularly , typical ly by deep gluteal injections.
They are also more potent than oral steroids because of their route
of delivery and perhaps also because they do not require additional
modification to protect them from immediate metabol ism by the
liver. The injectable compou nds have a wide range of half-lives.
Among the testoster one esters, testoster one propionate remains in
the circulation  for approximately 1.5 days, whereas testoster one
buciclate lasts f or thr ee months after a single injection (18).
Who Uses Anabolic Steroids?
It is believed that athletes (particularly strength athletes) whose
goals are to improve athletic performance are the prima ry users of
anabol ic steroids. George J. Mitchell, a former United States senator ,
in the famous 2007 “Mitchell Report, ” stated that use of androgenic -
anabol ic steroids by Major League Basebal l players in the United
States was pervasive (41). Before this revelation of anabol ic steroid
use in athletes, earlier reports date back to the 1952 and 1956
Olympics, in which there were accounts of systema tic use of
androgens by the Soviet weightl ifting team (41). State-sponsor ed
anabol ic steroid use in other countries has also been documented. In
the former German Democ ratic Republ ic after the fall of the
communist government in 1990, classified documents revealed a
secret state program beginni ng in 1966 to improve national athletic
performance using androgens (41, 75). In the United States,
widespr ead use has also been reported in powerl ifters (51), National
673
Footbal l League players (117), and collegiate athletes (146).
Additional ly, a 2014 estimate indicated that between 2.9 and 4.0
million America ns have likely used anabol ic steroids at some point in
their lifetime (173). Evidence also indicates that many steroid users
are secretive, with more than 50% of users indicating that they have
never disclose d their use of anabol ic steroids to their physician
(176). Therefore, anabol ic steroid use is still prevalent and an
important concern among recreational and athletic populations, with
some estimates suggesting roughly 100,000 new users per year
(24). Although results of several surveys suggest that anabol ic
steroid use appears to have been declining over the last few decades
(213), anabol ic steroids are among the top sport issues today
because of r eported use in man y sports o ver time (73).
Strength athletes are not the only users of anabol ic steroids.
People outside organized sport use steroids to enhance appear ance
rather than performance (56). National surveys of male American
high school seniors showed that approximately 7% were using, or
had used, anabol ic steroids (12, 35). One-thir d of the admitted
steroid users were not involved in school-sponsor ed sports, and
more than one-fourth stated that their main reason for using
steroids was to improve appear ance as opposed to athletic
performance. Pope and his colleagues (172, 174) described a subset
of bodybuilders with an altered self-image who believed that they
looked small and weak even though they were large and muscular .
These individuals used ergogenic substances and weight training to
increase their body size. Pope calls this condi tion “reverse anorexia
nervosa”; it is also known as muscle dysmorphia . These
bodybui lders appear to be substantial ly different from competi tive
athletes in terms of their objectiv es, the substantial health risks that
some of them are willing to take, and their strategies of using
extremely large doses of anabol ic steroids. This phenomenon may
suggest why the most serious illnesses associated with steroid use
have occurred almost exclusiv ely in bodybui lders and not in other
steroid-using athletes (77).
674
Efficacy
The purported ergogenic benefi ts commonly attributed to anabol ic
steroid use are increased muscle mass, strength, and athletic
performance, particularly in sports requiring maximal strength levels.
When anabol ic steroids are taken at supraphysiologic doses, these
ergogenic benefi ts are realized (25). The degree and incidence of
these changes are variable, depending greatly on, among other
factors, the tr aining status of the individual (25).
Muscle Mass and Strength
One of the primary reasons athletes and nonathletes take anabol ic
steroids is to increase lean muscle mass and maximal strength. If
such improvements do occur, this will lead to better performance on
the field, with all other variables of athleticism held constant. When
anabol ic steroids are given in doses similar to those used by
recreational ly trained and competi tive athletes, increases  in muscle
protein synthes is are seen (98). These increases in protein synthesis
are likely responsible for the increases observ ed in lean body mass in
both recreational ly trained and competi tive athletes taking anabol ic
steroids (107, 210). Even when anabol ic steroids are administer ed to
normal adult men not engaged in intensiv e resistance training,
increases in body mass, including the nonfat component, are
observ ed (25, 69). The extent to which gains in lean body mass and
maximal strength occur with anabol ic steroid use has been reported
in the scienti fic literature as a case study (3). In this study, an adult
male international-lev el bodybui lder self-injected androgenic
hormones (at a dosage of 53 mg/da y) for a training period of one
year that included only a four-week abstinence from drugs in the
middle of the year. During this time, the bodybui lder was able to
gain about 7 kilograms (15 lb) of fat-free weight, increase the mean
fiber area of the vastus lateralis muscle by approximately 11% in six
months’ time, and significantly increase maximal strength. Despi te
these improvements in muscle mass and strength, the individual’ s
health status was negativ ely affected. Specifically, after drug
675
withdrawal, the subject experienced atrophic testicles  and low
luteinizing hormone, follicle-stimulating hormone, and testoster one
levels. High-d ensity lipoprotein (HDL) cholester ol was also
significantly lower ed, which indicates a higher risk for atherogenesis.
See more information on the health consequences of anabol ic
steroid use in the Adv erse Ef fects section.
For some time it was postulated that increases in body mass with
androgen use came from an increase in body water (107). An
increase in total body water is expected with an increase in muscle
mass, since water consti tutes a majori ty of the cellular weight;
howev er, it has been postula ted that anabol ic steroids may increase
water retention as well by increasing intersti tial and extracellular
volume. Although water retention may explain why not all of the
weight gain is sustained after cessation of anabol ic steroid use, this
issue is still not well understood. In a study of experie nced male
bodybui lders, an eight-week cycle of nandr olone decanoate (200
mg/week, intramuscularly) resulted in a significant 2.2-ki logram (4.9
lb) increase in body mass, a 2.6-kilogram (5.7 lb) increase in fat-free
mass, and a 0.4-ki logram (0.9 lb) decrease in fat mass, with no
change in hydration of fat-free mass (210). Additional ly, the
extracellular and intracellular water ratio was unaltered. Even after
six weeks of discontinued androgen use, the body mass of the
bodybui lders was still significantly greater than baseline levels (1.6
kg [3.5 lb] greater), yet no hydration changes were seen. The
increase in fat-free mass and possible reduction in fat mass may last
for several months after cessation of use (69) (figure 12.2). Thus,
athletes may derive a benefi t from steroid use even if they stop
taking the drugs long enough before competi tion to obtain a
negativ e drug test. This is why unannounced, year-round drug
testing of some elite athletes is important for the prevention of
unfair drug use.
676
FIGURE 12.2 Changes in lean body mass with anabol ic steroid administr ation and
following drug cessation.
Data from Forbes et al. (1992).
Athletic Performance
Initially, researchers examin ing the ergogenici ty of exogenously
administer ed anabol ic steroids were unable to see any significant
performance effects (74, 201). Consequently , the scienti fic and
medical comm unity sugges ted that anabol ic steroids had little
influence on athletic performance. This, howev er, was contrary to
anecdotal reports emanating from gyms and training centers that
showed that athletes experienced large improvements in strength in
response to using anabol ic steroids. On further examina tion of the
initial studies, several methodological flaws became appar ent.
Several of these studies used physiological doses, in contrast to the
suprapharmacologic doses that are typical ly taken by athletes self-
administering androgens. In essence, these subjects were shutting
down their own endogenou s production and replacing it with an
exogenous anabol ic steroid. Another flaw in some of these
investigations was the method of strength assessment. In several
studies, strength performance was evaluated using a mode of
677
exercise that was different from the training stimulus. This lack of
specificity likely masked any possible training effect. Additional ly,
several studies used subjects who had only minimal resistance
training experience (74, 201). When exogenous androgens have
been adminis tered to experienced resistance-tr ained athletes,
significant strength gains have been consistently reported (4, 107).
Strength gains in experienced  strength-tr ained athletes are gener ally
quite small relative to those seen in novice athletes, but when
strength-tr ained athletes use anabol ic steroids, their strength gains
may be two to three times  higher than those typical ly seen in
similarly tr ained athletes who ar e not supplementing (107 , 210).
The purported ergogenic benefits commonly attributed
to anabolic steroid use are increased muscle mass,
strength, and athletic performance, but these changes
depend on the training status of the individual.
Psychological Effects
Anabol ic steroid use is also associated with changes in aggression,
arousal, and irritability (152). The East Germans reportedly used
anabol ic steroids for this effect, delivering high doses to the central
nervous system  by taking steroids through the nose. The issue has
not been well studied, but anecdotal reports suggest that this
practice markedly increased aggressiveness and enhanced
performance among athletes (75). Elevations in arousal and self-
esteem may be a positive side effect for the anabol ic steroid user.
Increases in aggressiveness may also be perceived as a benefi t,
especial ly for athletes participating in contact sports.
Increased aggressiveness may not be confined to athletic
performance, however. Anabo lic steroid users experiencing  increased
aggressiveness may pose a threat both to themselv es and to those
with whom they come in contact (163, 174). Anabol ic steroids are
also associated with mood swings and psychotic episodes. Studies
have shown that nearly 60% of anabol ic steroid users experience
678
increases in irritability and aggressiveness (174). Pope and
colleagues (175) reported significant elevations in aggressiveness
and manic scores following 12 weeks of testoster one cypionate
injections in a controlled double-bl ind crossover study. Interestingly ,
the results of this study were not uniform across the subjects. Most
subjects showed little psychological effect, and few developed
prominent effects. A cause- and-ef fect relationship has yet to be
identi fied in anabol ic steroid users, but it does appear that
individuals who experience psychological or behavioral changes
recover when ster oid use is discontinued (79).
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects associated with anabol ic steroid use are listed in
table 12.2. It is important to note that there are differences between
the side effects of anabol ic steroid use under medical supervision
and those associated with abuse (i.e., consumption of many drugs at
high doses). Most of the information concerning adverse medical
events associa ted with anabol ic steroid use has been acquir ed from
athletes self-administering the drugs. In conjunction, some of the
scienti fic literature has suggested that the medical problems related
to anabol ic steroids may be somewhat overstated (23, 225),
considering that many of the side effects linked to abuse are
reversible on cessation. Anecdotal ly, it appears that a
disproportionate magni tude of use and incidence of adverse events
are evident in bodybui lders (who are also known for consuming
several other drugs—such as diuretics, thyroid hormone s, insulin,
and anti-estr ogens—that relieve some side effects but potentiate
other risk f actors as wel l) compar ed to str ength and power athletes.
Testosterone Precursors (Prohormones)
Prohormones are precursors to the synthesis of other hormones and
are theoriz ed to increase the body’s ability to produce a given
specific hormone. The basis for the use of prohormones as an
ergogenic aid evolved from a study showing a threefold increase in
679
testoster one in healthy women who were given 100 milligrams of
either androstenedione or dehydroepiandr osterone (143). Athletes
who have continued to supplement with these testoster one
precursors (andr ostenedione, androstenediol, and
dehydroepiandr osterone [DHEA]) likely do so on the premise that
they will increase testoster one concentr ations, strength, muscle size,
and willingness to train, as well as providing overall athletic
performance enhancements similar to those experienced by people
taking anabol ic steroids. Howev er, these precursors have only
relatively weak androgenic properties in themselv es;
androstenedione and DHEA have only 1/5th and 1/10th the
biological activity of testoster one, respectiv ely (153). Nevertheless,
testoster one precursors were officially listed as controlled substances
in the 2004 Anabol ic Steroid Contr ol Act passed by the U.S.
Congr ess, which mandated a physician’ s prescription for these
substances.
TABLE 12.2  Signs and Symptoms of Ergogenic Aid
Abuse
Affected system Adverse effects
Cardiovascular Lipid pr ofile changes
Elevated blood pr essure
Decreased m yocardial function
Endocrine Gynecomastia
Decreased sperm count
Testicular atr ophy
Impotence and tr ansient inf ertility
Genitourinary Males
Decreased sperm count
Decreased testicular siz e
Females
Menstrual cy cle irr egulari ties
Clitoromegaly
Deepening of v oice
Mascul inization
680