# Section 12.2

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 12: Performance-Enhancing Substances and Methods

**Section:** 12.2 -- Hormones

**PDF Pages:** 681--700

Affected system Adverse effects
Males and f emales
Gynecomastia
Libido changes
Dermatological Acne
Male pat tern baldness
Hepatic Increased risk of l iver tumors and l iver damage
Musculosk eletal Prematur e epiph yseal plate closur e
Increased risk of tendon tears
Intramuscular abscess
Psychological Mania
Depression
Aggression
Hostility
Mood swings
Designer Anabolic Steroid Control Act of
2014 (DASCA)
In the past few decades, the United States Congr ess enacted laws regulating
anabol ic steroids. The first law was the Anabol ic Steroid Contr ol Act of 1990. This
was updated in 2004. Ten years later, this was updated again as the Designer
Anabol ic Steroid Contr ol Act of 2014 (DASCA). Noteworth y items about DASCA
include the f ollowing:
Congr ess felt that the laws before DASCA failed to sufficiently curtai l the
misuse of anabol ic ster oids.
Through DASCA, Congress targeted those who would circumvent the Anabol ic
Steroid Contr olled Act of 2004 by manuf acturing anabol ic steroids with
slightly different chemical structur es from those expressly controlled but that
are intended to cause the same potential ly harmf ul effects.
DASCA amended the defini tion of “anabol ic steroid” by adding 22 new
substances to the prior l ist.
Studies examining the efficacy of testoster one precursors have
produced varying results. No significant differences in strength or
body composi tion were seen in middle- aged men performing a
681
resistance training program while supplementing with either DHEA,
androstenedione (100 mg), or a placebo for three months (219).
When DHEA supplementation (150 mg) was examined in a group of
younger males (19-29 years) on a two-weeks-on, one-week-off cycle
for eight weeks, there were no gains in strength or lean tissue (33).
Additional ly, the investigators were unable to see any changes in
serum testoster one, estrone, estradiol, or lipid concentr ations with
supplementation. Even in studies using higher dosages (300 mg) of
androstenedione for eight weeks, in a similar two-weeks-on, one-
week-off protocol, no significant effect was observ ed in strength,
muscle size, or testoster one concentr ations (33). Howev er,
androstenedione supplement ation did cause an increase in serum
concentr ations of estradiol and estrone and was associated with
lower high-densi ty lipoprotein (HDL) levels. These results suggest
that although performance changes may not occur in athletes taking
this supplement, they may be at higher risk for some of the negativ e
side effects associated with anabol ic steroid use. Broeder and
colleagues (30), in the conclusion to their Andro Project study in
which they investigated the physiological and hormonal influences of
androstenedione in conjunction with a high-intensi ty resistance
training pr ogram, made the f ollowing statement:
Testoster one precursors do not enhance adaptations to
resistance training when consumed in dosages recomme nded
by manuf acturers. Testoster one precursor supplementation
does result in significant increases in estrogen-r elated
compounds, dehydroepiandr osterone sulfate concentr ations,
down-r egulation in testoster one synthesis, and unfavorable
alterations in blood lipid and coronary heart disease risk
profiles of men aged 35 to 65 y ears. (p . 3093)
Based on the scientific evidence, it appears as if prohormones fall
far short of providing the anabol ic effects gener ally associated with
androgens (32). Howev er, scienti fic resear ch has focused almost
exclusiv ely on only a few prohormone supplements—DHEA,
682
androstenediol, 19-nor -androstenedione, and 19-nor -androstenediol.
There are many other prohormone supplements available that have
not been clinically tested. Also, use of prohormones has not been
studied in highly trained athletes. In addition, oral administr ation has
been the primary method of taking prohormones. The oral use of
prohormones may not be as effective as other means of intake (e.g.,
injection). All of this suggests  that continued study of the efficacy of
the testoster one precursors for performance enhancement is still
needed; specifically warranted is examination of other routes of
ingestion in a tr ained competi tive athletic population.
Selective And rogen R eceptor Modulators
and Peptides
Selective androgen recep tor modulators (SARMs)  are tissue-
selectiv e agonists of androgen receptors in tissues such as muscle
and bone. As a result, SARMs are purported to have similar anabol ic
properties as traditional anabol ic steroids but with reduced
androgenic effects in other tissues where these effects are undesir ed
(e.g., liver or prostate). Therefore, there is also hope that SARMs
may produce more limited side effects when compar ed to anabol ic
steroids. The development of novel peptides , or short chains of
amino acids that regulate cellular functions and biochemical
processes, has been an emerging frontier in pharmaceutical
development alongside SARMs and, similar to SARMs, has potential
for selectiv e agonism and thus limited side effects. Due to their
significant clinical potential in diseases or disorders characteriz ed by
muscle wasting, SARMs and various peptides have been and
continue to be tested in preclinical studies and in clinical trials in
various patient populations. Howev er, there are no current FDA-
approved SARMs, and all are currently investigational drugs. All
SARMs are also currently prohibited both in and outside of
competi tion (i.e., at all times) for all athletes by WADA. Similarly,
hormone (e.g., testoster one, growth hormone, corticotrophin)-
stimulating peptides are prohibited at all times by WADA. Despi te
683
this, SARMs and peptides are widely marketed to and used
recreational ly by athletes and have also been found undisclosed in
dietary supplem ents (220). Table 12.3 lists SARMs that are popular
among recreational users. Athletes should be aware, howev er, that
products marketed and sold as SARMs or peptides may be just as
likely to contain a different drug or no SARMs or peptides at all.
Indeed, a chemical analysis of 44 products sold on the Internet as
SARMs indicate d that only 52% of these actual ly contained a SARM,
59% contained substance amounts that were different from that
listed on the label, and 39% contained a different unappr oved drug
altogether (212).
TABLE 12.3  Example Selective Androgen Receptor
Modulators (SARMs) Popular Among Recreational
Users
Research or developmental name Trade name
MK 2866/GTx -024 Enobosarm
Ostarine
GTx-007 Andarine
LGD-4033 Ligandr ol
RAD140 Testolone
S-23 —
YK-11 Myanabol
GSK2881078 —
Safety and Efficacy
Similar to anabol ic steroids, the purported ergogeni c benefi ts
attributed to SARMs include increased muscle mass, strength, and
performance. As alluded to previously , SARMs have primari ly been
tested in the context of clinical trials in patient population s in whom
muscle wasting  or muscle weakness are a major concern. Howev er,
there is some limited available evidence regarding the safety and
684
efficacy of SARMs in healthy individuals in phase 1 trials. For
example, three weeks of LGD-4033 (e.g., ligandr ol) use has been
shown to promote dose-dependent increases in lean body mass
among healthy young and middle- aged men (15). As is often
observ ed with oral androgen administr ation, these improvements in
lean body mass were observ ed alongside a dose-dependent
suppr ession of total testoster one, sex hormone–binding globul in
(SHBG), high-densi ty lipoprotein cholester ol (HDL-C), and
triglycerides (15). Similarly, other SARMs such as GSK2881078 and
GTx-024 (enobosarm) have been shown to cause dose-dependent
increases in lean mass and decreases in HDL-C, SHBG, and total
testoster one, suggestiv e of significant androgen receptor agonism
(43, 157), as well as decreased triglycerides, very-low-densi ty
lipoprotein, and apolipoprotein A1 (43). Most of these trials also
indicate that short-term SARM administr ation is well tolerated with
mild and infrequent adverse events relative to placebo but with
consistent decreases in HDL-C and increased alanine transaminase.
Thus, concern still exists related to hepato xicity with SARM use, and
there have been reports of adverse SARM-induced cardiovascular
and hepatic outcomes with certain SARMs (101). For example, case
reports have associated acute myocarditis and liver injury with
RAD140 use by recreational athletes, which appar ently resolved with
cessation of use (136, 162). Accordingly , the FDA issued a warning
to consumers that SARMs have been associated with serious or life-
threatening health problems that include increased risk of heart
attack or stroke, liver injury , sleep disturbances, sexual dysfunction,
and miscarriage.
Several of the peptides that have garner ed interest in
bodybui lding communi ties, such as the growth hormone (GH)
secretagogue MK-677, showed preliminary efficacy for increasing
bone turnover and fat-free mass in older adults (156), but clinical
trials were terminated early due to significant safety signals such as
increased incidence of congestive heart failure (2). A case report
indicated that a five-week cycle of coadminister ed LGD-4033 and
685
MK-677 was associated with adverse effects on cholester ol,
testoster one, liver function markers, and bone miner al density in a
25-year-old resistance-tr ained male (37). Somapaci tan, an FDA-
approved peptide for use in adults with GH deficiency , reduces trunk
fat and increases lean body mass in adults with GH deficie ncy (124).
Howev er, it is notable that chronic (~20 weeks) administr ation of
peptides such as hexar elin have no effects on body composi tion
despite causing profound increases in GH release in healthy adults
(178). Other peptides, such as the GLP-1 receptor agonists
liraglutide and semaglutide, have demonstr ated strong efficacy for
weight loss in individuals with overweight or obesity (169, 223), and
despite a lack of evidence for efficacy among individua ls without
excess body fat, these weight loss effects may be intriguing to
recreational users for cosmetic reasons. Table 12.4 lists some
example peptid e hormone classes that are explicitly named on the
WADA banned l ist.
Despi te the promise of short-term safety and efficacy displa yed by
several SARMs in initial clinical trials among healthy individuals,
substantial work is still necessary to understand the short- and long-
term risks associated with SARM and peptide use, understanding
that each SARM and peptide is structur ally different and is therefore
likely to produce different primary and secondary (or side) effects.
Moreover, and as noted earlier, in many cases, SARMs available on
the market may include other potential ly unsaf e, nondisclosed
substances or may not contain the disclosed SARM at all (212);
therefore, risks of SARM or peptide use may be amplified among
recreational users. Figure 12.3 lists the short-term changes in lean
mass whi le consuming sev eral different types of S ARMs.
TABLE 12.4  Example Peptide Hormone Classes and
Specific Peptides Used by Recreational Users
Explicitly Named on the WADA Banned List
686
Testosterone stimulating
peptidesChorionic gonadotr opin, luteinizing hormone (LH),
gonadotr opin r eleasing hormone (GnRH, gonador elin)
and its agonist analogues (buser elin, deslor elin,
goser elin, leupr orelin, naf arelin, and triptor elin),
kisspeptin and i ts agonist analogues
Corticotrophin and
corticotrophin releasing
factorsCoricor elin and tetr acosactide
Growth hormone (GH) and
its analoguesLonapegsomatr opin, somapaci tan, somatr ogon, AOD-
9604, and hGH 176-191
Growth hormone
secretagogues/releasing
peptidesGHRH, sermor elin, CJC -1293/1295, tesamor elin, MK -677,
lenomor elin (ghr elin), anamor elin, macimor elin,
tabimor elin, capr omorelin, alexamor elin, examor elin
(hexar elin), GHRP-1–6
Growth factors and growth
factor modulatorsIGF-1, mecasermin, FGFs, HGF , MGFs, PDGF , TB-500,
VEG-Fs, and an y other gr owth f actors or gr owth f actor
modulators
Erythropoietins (EPO) and
agents affecting
erythropoiesisErythr opoietin r eceptor agonists (dEPO), EPO , EPO-
based constructs (EPO-Fc, CERA), EPO-mimetic agents
and their constructs (CNT O-530, peginesatide); h ypoxia
inducible f actor (HIF) activ ating agents (cobal t,
daprodustat, IO X2, mol idustat, r oxadustate, v adadustat,
and x enon); GA TA inhibi tors; tr ansforming gr owth f actor
beta ( TGF-β) signal ing inhibi tors (luspater cept,
sotater cept); innate r epair r eceptor agonists (asialo EPO ,
CEPO)
Data from World Anti-Doping Agency , “World Anti-Doping Code International Standar d
Prohibited List 2025, ” last modified September 12, 2024, https:// www.wada-ama.org/sites
/default/files/2024 -09/2025l ist_en_final _clean _12_september _2024 .pdf.
687
FIGURE 12.3 Changes in total body lean mass in response to short-term LGD-4033
administr ation in healthy young men (squar es), GSK2881078 administr ation in older men
and postmenopausal women (gender  symbols), and GTx-024 in older men and women
(triangles). Changes in lean body mass gener ally demonstr ated dose dependency , with
greater changes observ ed in r esponse to higher doses.
Data from Basaria et al. (2013), Neil et al. (2018); Dalton et al. (2011).
Adverse Effects
No known reports or scienti fic studies have investigated the adverse
effects of selectiv e andr ogen r eceptor modulators and peptides.
HCG (Human Chorionic Gonadotropin)
Human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG)  is a hormone obtained
from the placenta of pregnan t women and is very closely related in
structur e and function to luteinizing hormone. In fact, it is the
pregnancy indicator used by over-the-counter pregnancy test kits,
since it is generally not found in the body at any other time. In the
gener al popul ation, HCG is sometimes injected into overweight
females under medical supervision in conjunction with low-calorie
diets for the purposes of weight loss (87). Resear ch suggests that
when used for this purpose, HCG is not effective for inducing weight
loss. The caloric restriction that accompanies the HCG injections
appears to be the main contributing factor to associated weight loss
(87).
688
Efficacy
While HCG offers females no performance-enhancing ability, it is
cited anecdotal ly as useful for males who take anabol ic steroids.
When injected into men, HCG can increase testicular testoster one
production; testoster one levels can nearly double within four days
after a large intramuscular injection (48). The activity of HCG in the
male body is due to its ability to mimic luteinizing hormone, a
pituitary hormone that stimu lates the Leydig cells in the testicles to
manuf acture testoster one. The reason males would want to be
injected with HCG to increase endogenous testoster one levels is that
endogenous testoster one production is suppr essed at the end of a
steroid cycle (151, 154). For that reason, if HCG is used by athletes,
it is likely used by those who are finishing a cycle of anabol ic
steroids and are looking to activate their own endogenous
testoster one pr oduction.
Adverse Effects
Human chorionic gonadotr opin is given as an injection under the
skin or into a muscle; the side effects that are common to such
administr ation are pain, swelling, and tenderness around the
injection site. There is very little resear ch on the side effects of HCG
injections. In one investigatio n in which HCG was injected into obese
women, no adverse effects were reported in relation to blood
pressure or r outine blood work (197).
Insulin
Insulin  is a potent anabolic hormone . It is secreted by the pancr eas
in response to elevations in blood glucose or specific amino acid
(e.g., leucine) concentr ations . Its role is to facilitate the uptak e of
glucose and amino acids into the cell. Since insulin increases protein
synthesis, i t is consider ed an anabol ic hormone.
689
Efficacy
When insulin concentr ations are elevated naturally (i.e.,
endogenously from the pancreas following carboh ydrate ingestion),
there are no safety concerns in otherwise healthy individuals.
Additional ly, it has been reported that postwork out carbohydrate
ingestion suppresses muscle protein breakdown via the anticatabol ic
effects of insulin (29). Theor etically, if protein breakdown is
suppr essed over several weeks to months, gains in lean muscle
mass could be r ealized.
Adverse Effects
Because of insulin’s anabol ic properties and its rumor ed ability to
potentiate the effects of growth hormone and insulin-like growth
factors, some individuals (primari ly bodybui lders) take insulin by
injection. The use of insulin in this manner comes with serious
consequences. Possible outcomes in a previously healthy athlete
include immediate death or coma due to sev ere hypogly cemia (106).
Human Growth Hormone
Human growth hormone (HGH) , a protein secreted from the
anterior pituitary gland, has several important physiological functions
that enhance its ergogenic effect. It is anabol ic due to its stimulation
of bone and skeletal muscle growth, but it also has important
metabol ic functions such as maintaining blood glucose levels,
increasing the uptak e of glucose and amino acids into muscle cells
(67), and stimulating r elease of f atty acids f rom the f at cel ls.
The primary source of pharmacologic growth hormone is a
relatively compl icated molecule from which it is synthetical ly derived
using recombinant DNA technology . Howev er, until 1986, the only
source of the hormone was the pituitaries of human cadavers.
Because HGH receptors are unable to cross-react with growth
hormone from animal sources, the financial cost of HGH was very
high before 1986. Although  the use of cadaver growth hormone
came with significant health risks, these consequences did not
690
prevent athletes from taking the supplement but instead only
substantial ly restricted use (115). The development of recombinant
HGH provided clinicians with a relatively low-risk drug at a lower cost
(as compar ed to cadaver growth hormone) with greater availability.
Clinicians can now prescribe recombinant HGH to increase statur e in
short children with growth hormone deficiency and alter body
composi tion in adults. The use of HGH as a performance -enhancing
substance is believed to be widespr ead among professional athletes;
it is either taken alone or stacked with anabol ic steroids (16). Even
though recombinant technology has increased the availability of
HGH, its cost, especial ly on the black market, is extremely high—
between several hundr ed and a few thousand dollars per month.
Humatr ope, Nutropin, Norditropin, Genotr opin, Omnitrope, Serostim,
Saizen, and Protropin are brand names of HGH commonly used in
the Uni ted States.
Efficacy
There appear to be no studie s on the efficacy of HGH in professional
athletes. Most investigations of HGH have focused on HGH as
replacement therapy in growth hormone–deficient adults and
children or in healthy older individuals. These studies have
consistently shown positive alterations in body composi tion
(increases in lean body tissue  with decreases in body fat) (66, 204).
In men with establ ished growth hormone deficiencie s, nightly
injections of recombinant HGH for six months resulted in an average
increase of 12 pounds (5.4 kg) in lean body mass and a similar
amount of fat loss (184). Most studies have not addressed the effect
of HGH therapy on muscle strength and performance. One study
showed no changes in isokinetic strength following 12 months of
therapy (112). Howev er, the subjects in that study did not perform
any resistance training during the course of treatmen t. A study
involving trained adults given growth hormone (three days per week
for six weeks) showed mode st changes in body composi tion, but no
strength assessment was performed (50). Although the scienti fic
691
literature does not provide support for the efficacy of HGH use in
athletic populations, it is likely that the inability to perform such
studies (due to ethical constr aints) will limit much of our
understanding of HGH and human performance. In years past, the
use of HGH by athletes may have been prevalent in some
professional sports because of its perceived efficacy and the fact that
it could not be detected in random drug tests . Currently, HGH
cannot be detected in the urine via a drug test, and it may be
postulated that athletes opt to use it for this reason. Howev er, a
blood test for HGH was first introduced at the 2004 Summer Olympic
Games in A thens, Gr eece.
Growth hormo ne is a protein molecule. Injection is necessary in
order to avoid its complete metabol ism and maintain its
effectiveness. Oral ingestion does not result in any benef it. Many of
the actions of growth hormone are mediated through insulin-like
growth factor-1 (IGF-1), another peptide hormone, which is
produced and secreted from the liver in response to growth hormone
stimulation. IGF-1 is now being synthesiz ed using recombinant DNA
technology and wi ll likely pr oduce the same ef fects as HGH.
Adverse Effects
The use of HGH does, howev er, present some potential  significant
health risks. Excessiv e secretion of growth hormone during
childhood causes gigantism, a condi tion in which a person becomes
abnormal ly tall. After pubert y, once linear growth has stopped,
excess secretion of growth hormone causes acromegaly , a
disfiguring disease characteriz ed by a widening of the bones,
arthri tis, organ enlargement, and metabol ic abnormal ities. This is a
potential risk for athletes who use HGH as an ergogenic aid.
Additional ly, these side effects may provide some indication that the
athlete could be using this drug. In clinical studies in growth
hormone–deficient adults, side effects appear to be minim al for even
up to two years of replacement therapy (1, 209). Howev er, athletes
who supplement with HGH gener ally use dosages that far exceed the
692
doses commonly administer ed in replacement treatment (16). Thus,
one should not assume that HGH use is benign with regard to
adverse medic al events in doses commonly used by an athletic
population. Adverse side effects for HGH abuse are diabetes in prone
individuals; cardiovascular dysfunction; muscle, joint, and bone pain;
hypertension; abnormal growth of organs; and accelerated
osteoarthri tis (16).
Although growth hormon e used as replacement therapy
for people with growth hormone or IGF-1 deficiency can
be effectiv e and can have minimal adverse
consequences, the dosages that are likely used by
athletes may pose a significant risk for acromegaly.
Erythropoietin
One of the limiting factors for endur ance performance is the athlete’ s
ability to deliver oxygen to the contracting skeletal muscle . Over the
years, several methods have been developed to increase the body’s
ability to deliver oxygen. Some methods include novel training
programs that may naturally elevate red blood cell and hemoglobin
levels (i.e., living and training at altitude), while other methods
involve synthetic means to elevate the oxygen-carrying capaci ty of
the blood (i.e., blood doping). Blood doping increases  one’s red
blood cell mass and is typically conducted using blood transfusions
or taking a hormone known as erythr opoietin . There are two forms
of blood doping via blood transfusions: autologous and homologous.
Autologous blood doping is the transfusion of one’s own blood,
which has been stored (refrigerated or frozen) until needed.
Homologous blood doping is the transfusion of blood that has been
taken from another person with the same blood type. Since the late
1980s, blood doping via autologous blood transfusion has taken a
back seat to the more popular method, administr ation of
recombinant human erythr opoietin (39).
693
Erythropoietin (EPO)  is produced in the kidneys and stimulates
the production of new red blood cells. It is also a protein hormone
that can be produced by recombinant DNA techniqu es and is
reportedly being abused by athletes (64). Erythr opoietin use was
one of the methods of doping that Lance Armstr ong admitted to
over the course of his cycling career. The EPO level in the blood
increases in response to chronic aerobic endur ance exercise. In
certain types of anemia, especial ly in kidney patients with
inadequate EPO production, recombinant human EPO can improve
the qual ity of life of the individual.
Efficacy
Injections of EPO are gener ally associated with elevations in both
hematocri t and hemoglobin. A 2013 systematic review and meta-
analysis indicated that EPO administr ation promotes increases in
hemoglobin and hematocri t of 5% to 17% and 8% to 19%,
respectiv ely (108). These increases are accompanied by increases in
aerobic capaci ty and maxima l power output of 7% to 10%, which
are in turn linked with improvements in time to exhausti on in open
endpoint exercise for both trained (9%-17%) and untrained
(22%-50%) individuals (108). Therefore, the ability of EPO to
enhance oxygen-carrying capaci ty of the blood suggests it is likely to
be an effective ergogenic aid for the aerobic endur ance athlete.
Initial evidence also indicates  that 16 days of EPO administr ation can
elicit changes in the skeletal muscle proteome in a manner that
supports aerobic exercise performance (e.g., increased oxidativ e
enzyme activity) (42). Howev er, it is also important to note that the
effect of EPO administr ation on time trial performance or other
parameters critical toward aerobic exercise performance such as the
ventilatory threshold, critical velocity, or critical power is not well
understood. While much of the resear ch conducted with EPO is
focused on endur ance performance, there is theoretical rationale for
EPO use by anaer obic athletes to improve recovery from high-
intensi ty efforts.
694
Adverse Effects
While medical ly supervised use of EPO provides therapeutic benefi t
in the treatmen t of anemia related to kidney disease, its misuse can
lead to serious health risks for athletes who use this substance
simply to gain a competi tive edge. The increase in hematocri t
resulting from EPO injection presents a significant health risk.
Increases in red blood cell number increase blood viscosi ty (the
thickening of the blood). This poses several problems that include
increased risk of blood clotting, elevations in systol ic blood pressure
and accentuation of the exercise pressor response stroke, and
cerebral or pulmonary embol ism (22, 42, 82). During aerobic
endur ance events, the additional problem of dehydration could
compound cardiovascular risks by eliminating any safety margin in
the balance between performance advantages from artificially
increased hematocri t and decrements from increased blood viscosi ty.
Several studies have noted marked accentuation of the blood
pressure response during exercise following EPO administ ration. The
deaths of a number of compe titive cyclists have been related to EPO
administr ation (82). The primary risk associated with EPO is its lack
of predictability compar ed to red blood cell infusion. Once EPO is
injected into the body, the stimulus for producing red blood cells is
no longer under control. Consequently , aerobic endur ance athletes
should avoid this drug because of the significant cardiovascular risk,
leading to possible death, associated wi th its administr ation.
β-Adrenerg ic Agonists
Synthetic β-adrenergic agonists, or β-agonists , are substances
chemical ly related to epinephrine, a hormone produced in the
adrenal medul la that regulates physiological effects, such as
lipolysis  (the breakdown of fat) and thermogenesis  (increased
energy expendi ture resulting in the production of heat). β-Agonists
were original ly developed for the treatment of asthma and other life-
threatening medical condi tions. Some of these compounds have
been found to have specific effects on body composi tion, such as
695
increases in lean mass and decreases in stored fat (177); because of
this, these drugs are sometimes referred to as partitioning agents .
One of the more popular β-agonists used by athletes is the drug
clenbuter ol (177).
Efficacy
Clenbuter ol is a β2-agonist and is a widely used bronchodi lator (used
to reverse bronchial restriction) in many parts of the world. Athletes
use clenbuter ol as an ergogenic aid to increase lean muscle tissue
and reduce subcutaneous fat (177). Data on the effectiveness of
clenbuter ol have typical ly been based not on healthy athletes, but
rather subjects with heart failure (125) and patients experiencing
muscle- wasting condi tions (144). Though studies in humans are
limited, several findings have indicated an ergogenic potential of β2-
agonists for strength improvements (145). Athletes generally use
clenbuter ol in doses twice the recommended amounts administer ed
for clinical purposes, in a cyclic fashion (three weeks on alternated
with three weeks off, with a two-da ys-on, two-da ys-off cycle during
the “on” week) (177).
Adverse Effects
Athletes consume clenbuter ol in a capsule form, in contrast to the
inhalation route that is often used for relieving bronchial constriction.
Although a number of potential side effects have been suggested
(i.e., transien t tachycardia, hyperthermia, tremors, dizziness,
palpitations, and insomnia),  actual documented events are quite
limited (196). In addition, the scarcity of data on the ergogenic
potential of clenbuter ol in humans makes determining its efficacy
difficult.
β-Blockers
β-Blockers  are a class of drugs that block the β-adrenergic
receptors, preventing the catecholamines (i.e., norepinephrine and
epinephrine) from binding. β-Blockers are gener ally prescribed by
696
cardiologists for the treatment of a wide variety of cardiovascular
diseases, including hyperten sion. The ergogenic benefi t of these
drugs may reside in their ability to reduce anxiet y and tremors
during performance (138). Thus, athletes who rely on steady ,
controlled movements during performance (i.e., archers or
marksmen) would appear to benefi t from these drugs. Also, β-
blockers may improve physiological adaptations from aerobic
endur ance training by causing an upregulation of β-receptors. If this
is true, it would result in an exagger ated response to sympathetic
dischar ge during intense ex ercise on cessation of supplementation.
Efficacy
Several studies  have shown that β-block ers can improve both slow
and fast shooting accuracy (7, 135). In addition, the dose taken
appears to have significant effects on the magni tude of
improvement. In shooters who administer ed β-block ers in two
different doses  (80 mg vs. 40 mg of oxprenolol), the group taking
the higher dose shot with greater accuracy (7). In certain sports,
howev er, some degree of anxiet y may be important. Tesch (205)
reported that bowlers whose performance was improved during
blockade with oxprenolol had significantly greater heart rates before,
during, and after competi tion than subjects whose performance did
not impr ove whi le on β-block ers.
Impact of Alcohol on Performance
Both acute and chronic alcohol consum ption can impede exercise performance by
adversely affecting  several physiological processes critical toward optim izing
performance and recovery. Perhaps most obviously , acute alcohol consumption can
impair performance in skilled tasks by effects on fine motor control, reaction time,
judgment, and arousal (191). Howev er, acute alcohol consumption has also been
shown to impede skeletal muscle metabol ism, recovery, and adaptation. For
example, isometric and dynamic strength loss induced by strenuous eccentric
exercise is exacerbated by high-dose postex ercise alcohol consumption (~6.3
standar d drinks over 1.5 hours, where a standar d drink contains 14 g of pure
alcohol) in young men (14), although strength trained women may be protected
from this effect (137). Similarly, mechanistic studies suggest that acute high-dose
697
(~4–8.5 standar d drinks) alcohol ingestion after strenuous resistance or high-
intensi ty interv al training impedes exercise-induced phosphorylation of the
mammal ian target of rapam ycin comp lex 1 (mTORC1) pathway and reduces  rates
of muscle  protein synthesis, an effect that also appears to be most prominent in
men (60, 165). Alcohol also has known diuretic effects, causing an increase in
excess urine production of about 10 milliliters for every gram of ethanol ingested
(63). Therefore, hydration-r elated effects are most significant when concentr ated
alcohol solutions are consumed, and consumption of dilute alcohol solutions or
alcohol with adequa te additional fluid intake can offset the diuretic effect (191). In
addition, large alcohol doses can dramatical ly affect thermor egulatory ability,
augmenting en vironmental heat loss at low ambient temper atures (88, 89).
Finally, alcohol can impair exercise performance and recovery via effects on
sleep and autonomic function. For example, evening binge alcohol consumption (4-
5 standard drinks within 2 hours) disrupts sleeping cardiac vagal tone and reduces
sleep quality (53, 93), and increases sympathoex citation and disrupts blood
pressure regulation the following morning (94). These disruptions may serve to
increase cardiovascular strain and impair performance during subsequent exercise,
although this has not been directly tested. It is important to note that many of
these effects are likely dependent on the amount of alcohol consumed, and studies
to tease out dose-d ependent effects (particularly at high doses) are difficult both
logistical ly and ethical ly.
Evidence also shows that chronic alcohol consumption can impair muscle
metabol ism and impede training-induced adaptations. Skeletal muscle from middle-
aged men and women with chronic alcohol abuse displa ys increased catabol ic
markers (e.g., MurF-1, ubiquinated proteins), decreased anabol ic markers (e.g.,
phosphorylated 4E-BP1), and decreased insulin receptor substr ate 1, which plays a
critical role in transmi tting signals from insulin and IGF-1 to coordinate cellular
growth and metabo lism (189, 190). Therefore, chronic alcohol consumptio n can
impede training-r elated adaptations and promote signatur es consistent  with
myopath y in muscle, but the degree to which these effects occur are likely directly
related to the degr ee of alcohol use (or abuse).
Adverse Effects
β-Blockers may also have an ergolytic  effect (reduce performance).
Studies have shown that β-block ers impair the cardiovascular
response to exercise by reducing maximal heart rate, oxygen
consumption, and 10-kilometer (6.2 miles) race time performance
(6). Also, β-block ers are associated with an increased rating of
perceived exertion (205). Risks associated with these drugs include
bronchospasm, heart failure, prolonged hypogly cemia, bradycardia,
heart block, and intermi ttent claudication (78).
698
Dietary Supplements
The global market for sports nutrition products continues to grow at
a significant pace, with an estimated market value of over US$53.6
billion (208). Some sports nutrition companies make unsubstantiated
claims concerning the efficacy of their products. At times,
unscrupulous companies have knowingly placed analogs of banned
substances in their products to enhance their effects (44). As a
result, much confusion has been created among athletes regarding
appropriate supplements and the ethics of companies. This section
describes dietary supplements that are commonly used by athletes
and pr esents scienti fic examination of their ef ficacy .
Essential Amino Acids, Branched-Chain
Amino Acids
Essential amino acids (EAAs) are not produced in the body and
must be obtained through the diet. They include histidine,
isoleucine, leucine, valine, lysine, methionine, phenylalanine,
threonine, and tryptophan. High levels of EAAs can be found in any
number of animal-based proteins or as supplements sold over the
counter . Leucine can also be found in plants such as spinach and
broccoli, but the amount of leucine is minimal when compar ed to
that in animal-based sour ces.
Efficacy
Scientists have been able to delineate certain categories of amino
acids as well as individual amino acids and their role in stimulating
muscle protein synthesis. For example, Tipton and colleagues (206)
reported that nonessential amino acids were not necessary to
stimulate muscle protein synthesis; rather, only the presence of EAAs
is needed. In this resear ch (206), six healthy adults, three males and
three females, participated in resistance exercise (8 sets of 8
repetitions at 80% 1RM) and then consumed either 40 grams of
mixed amino acids (composed of both nonessential and essential
699
amino acids), 40 grams of EAA, or a placebo . While the mixed amino
acids and the EAA induced an anabol ic response that was
significantly greater than with the placebo treatment, no difference
was observed between the amino acid treatments. Since there was
no difference, it was conclu ded that nonessential amino acids are
not needed to stimulate muscle protein synthesis. In a follow-up
study, using the same protocol (but with only 6 g EAA and 35 g
sugar), Rasmu ssen and colleagues (180) demonstr ated significantly
greater anabol ic drive—that is, the building of new muscle tissue—
with the EAA supplement (when given shortly after resistance
exercise) v ersus the placebo .
Subsequently , Tipton and colleagues (207) examined the effects
of consuming 6 grams EAA plus 36 grams of sugar, before or after
resistance training, on muscle protein metabol ism. They reported
that when the EAA plus sugar was consumed 30 minutes before
resistance training, the acute (3 hr after exercise) anabol ic response
was 158% greater than when the EAA and sugar supple ment were
consumed after training. As a result of these acute findings, Tipton
and colleagues (207) and Rasmussen and colleagues (180) theoriz ed
that a person who consume d EAA before or after (or both before
and after) every resistance training session over a period of weeks
would experience greater changes in muscle mass than with training
only. It is important to note that although the nonessential amino
acids are not required to stimulate muscle protein synthesis, this
does not mean that they are not important for maximizing training
adaptations in the athlete. The condi tional ly essential and
nonessential amino acids serve as the substr ates that are
incorpor ated into the newly formed muscle proteins; further , they
also spare the conversion of these amino acids from the essential
ones, thus ef fectively incr easing the lev els of EAAs.
Prior work in animal models further identi fied that of the eight
EAAs, it is the branched-chain amino acids (BCAAs) —isoleucine,
leucine, and valine—that are responsible for increasing muscle
protein synthe sis (83). Of the BCAAs, it appears that leucine is the
700