# Chapter 13: Principles of Test Selection and Administration

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

**PDF Pages:** 729--763

CHAPTER  13
PRINCIPLES OF TEST
SELECTION AND
ADMINISTRATION
Claire Brady, PhD, and John McMahon, PhD
The autho rs would like to acknowledge the significant contributions of Michael McGuigan
and Ev erett Harman to this chapter .
After completing this chapter, you will be able to
identi fy and explain r easons f or perf orming tests wi th athletes;
understand testing terminology to communicate clearly wi th
athletes and col leagues;
evaluate the v alidity and r eliability of a test and i ts metrics;
select appr opriate tests and metrics; and
administer test pr otocols pr operly and saf ely.
The strength and condi tioning professional with a broad
understanding of exercise and sport science can effectively use tests
and measur ements to make training decisions that help athletes
achiev e their goals, maximiz e their performance potent ial, reduce
injury risk, or facilitate recovery from fatigue and injury . Tests and
measur ements form the objectiv e core of the athlete evaluation
process. This chapter covers the reasons for testing, testing
729
terminology , evaluation of test quality, the selection of appropriate
tests and metrics, and aspects of pr oper test administr ation.
730
Reasons for Testing
Testing helps athletes and coaches objectiv ely assess athletic talent
and identi fy physical abilities and areas in need of improvement. In
addition, test scores can be used in goal setting by setting attainable
benchmarks for athletes to aim for. Baseline measur ements can be
used to establ ish starting points against which achiev able training
goals can be set, and testing at regular interv als can help track an
athlete’ s progress in reaching those goals and provide insight into
fatigue, readiness, and injury risk. Using tests as a basis for goal
setting allows coaches to set specific goals for individual athletes
that, when taken together , help to accompl ish group or team
objectiv es (see chapter 9  for mor e information about goal set ting).
Assessment of Athletic Talent
It is important for a coach to determine whether an individual has
the physical potential to play a sport at the competi tive level of the
team. That judgment is not difficult if the candidate has already
excelled at the sport elsew here and is of adequate body size.
Howev er, in many cases, candidates have not clearly demonstr ated
their competi tive abilities or may lack experience in the sport. The
coach then needs some way of determining whether the candidate
has the necessary basic physical abilities that, in combination with
technique training and practice, could produce a competi tive player.
Field tests serve as tools for such assessment, and this application of
testing is r eferred to as talent identification .
Identification of Physical Abilities in N eed
of Improvement
While some physical abilities are innate and not amenable to
change, other physical abilities can be improved through training. By
using appropriate testing methods and analysis, the strength and
condi tioning professional can determine which physical qualities can
be targeted by participation in prescribed exercise programs (28,
731
29). This can only be achiev ed with an understanding of normativ e
data for key test metrics (see chapter 14 for normativ e data
examples); this allows the strength and condi tioning practitioner to
objectiv ely compar e athletes’ performances to representativ e
normativ e values and identi fy relative strengths and areas for
improvement.
Evidence-Based Testing
Evidence-based testing is essential, because it ensur es that training programs are
based on scienti fic resear ch and empirical evidence, which are both equally
important. S ome of the k ey reasons f or this f ollow:
Validity and reliability . Evidence-based testing provides a framework for
selecting tests that are both valid and reliable. By using validated and reliable
tests, practitioners can confidently assess an athlete’ s capabi lities and track
progress.
Individualization . Every athlete has distinct strengths, weaknesses, and
goals. Evidence-based testing allows practitioners to modify training
programs to the specific needs of each athlete. By conducting assessments
based on scienti fic evidence, strength and condi tioning professionals can
identi fy areas in need of improvement and develop targeted interv entions to
optimiz e perf ormance.
Injury prevention . Evidence-based testing helps identi fy biomechanical ly
inefficient movement patterns and muscular imbalances that may predispose
athletes to injury . By addressing these issues through targeted training
interv entions, strength and condi tioning professionals can reduce the risk of
injury and enhance athletic longevi ty.
Performance optimization . Evidence-based testing enables strength and
condi tioning professionals to identi fy performance-l imiting factors and
develop strategies to optimiz e athletic performance. By assessing key
physiological parameters such as strength, power , agility, and aerobic
endur ance, strength and condi tioning professionals can design training
programs that target specific areas for improvement, leading to enhanced
athletic perf ormance.
Monitoring prog ress. Regular assessmen t is essential for monitoring
progress and evaluating the effectiveness of training interv entions. Evidence-
based testing provides objectiv e measur es of performance that allows
strength and condi tioning professionals to track changes over time and make
data-driv en decisions regarding program modifications. This ensur es that
training pr ograms r emain al igned wi th perf ormance goals.
732
Professional credibility . In an increasingly competi tive field, evidence-
based practice enhances the credibility and reputation of strength and
condi tioning professionals. By basing their work in scienti fic evidence,
practitioners demonstr ate a commi tment to ex cellence and pr ofessional ism.
A variety of reputab le sources, such as the following, can be used to ensur e that
assessments and pr actices ar e grounded in scienti fic evidence:
Peer-reviewed journals
Academic textbooks
Professional or ganizations
Meta- analyses and systematic r eviews
Conferences and workshops
Evidence-based pr actice databases
In-house data col lection
Screening  for Fatigue and Injury Risk
Monitoring acute and chronic fatigue due to training and competi tion
exposur es and associated injury risk factors can allow the strength
and condi tioning profession al to prospectiv ely modula te training
programs to promote athlete health and performance. Although both
fatigue and injury risk mechanisms are complex and multifaceted,
combining quanti tative and qualitative tests can provide valuable
insights for the strength and condi tioning professional and inform
any requirements for acute adjustments to predetermined training
programs, particularly during the competi tion period.
Testing can be used to assess athletic talent, identify
physical abilities and areas in need of improvement, set
goals, and evaluate progress.
733
Testing Terminology
To communicate clearly with athletes and colleagues, strength and
condi tioning professionals should use consistent termin ology. The
following terms and defini tions are widely accepted and are used in
this text:
test— A procedur e for assessing abi lity in a particular endea vor.
monitoring— Taking repeat measur es of an athlete to help guide
the tr aining pr ocess wi th appr opriate data.
field test—A test used to assess ability that is performed away
from the laboratory and does not require extensiv e training or
expensiv e equipment (11).
measurement— The pr ocess of col lecting test data (15).
evaluation— The process of analyzing test results for the purpose
of making decisions. For example, a strength and condi tioning
professional examines the results of physical performance tests to
determine whether the athlete’ s training program is effective in
helping achiev e the training goals or whether modification s in the
program ar e needed.
pretest— A test administer ed before the beginning of training to
determine the athlete’ s initial basic ability levels. A pretest allows
the strength and condi tioning professional to design the training
program in keeping with the athlete’ s initial training level and the
overall program objectiv es.
midtest— A test administer ed one or more times during the
training period  to assess progress and modify the program as
needed to maximiz e benefi t.
formative evaluation— Periodic reevaluation based on midtests
administer ed during the training, usually at regular interv als (2).
It enables monitoring of the athlete’ s progress and adjust ment of
the training program according to the athlete’ s individual needs. It
also allows evaluation of different training methods and collection
734
of normativ e data. Regular modification of the training program
based on formativ e evaluation keeps the training program fresh
and inter esting and helps a void ph ysical and mental staleness.
posttest— Test administer ed after the training period to determine
the success of the training  program in achieving the training
objectiv es.
735
Evaluation of Test Quality
Test results are valuable only when two key criteria are met: validity
and reliability. Validity ensur es the test accurately measur es its
intended attribute, while reliability guarantees consistency in
measur ement across multiple instances. These fundamental
characteristics are essential in assessing the quality of a test and its
associated metrics. Both must meet acceptable standar ds for the
test to pr ovide meaningf ul benefi ts.
Validity
Validity  refers to the degree to which a test or test item measur es
what it is supposed to measur e and is one of the most important
characteristics of testing (2, 25). For tests of physical properties such
as heigh t and weight, validity is easy to establ ish. For example, close
correspondence between the readings on a spring scale and the
readings on a calibrated balance scale indicates validity of weighing
with the spring scale. The validity of tests of basic athletic abilities or
capaci ties is more difficult to establ ish. There are several types of
validity, including construct validity, face validity, content validity, and
criterion v alidity.
To be valid, physical performance tests should measure
abilities important in the sport, produce repeatable
results (see the later section on reliability), measure the
performance of one athlete at a time (unless otherwise
specified in the protocol), appear meaningful, be of
suitable difficulty, be able to differentiate between
various levels of ability, permit accurate scoring, include
a sufficient number of trials, and withstand the test of
statistical evaluation. Given the choice between  two
valid tests, consideration should be given to simplicity
and economy of test administration.
736
Construct Validity
Construct validity  is the ability of a test to represent the
underlying construct (the theory developed to organize and explain
some aspects of existing knowledge and observ ations). Construct
validity refers to overall validity, or the extent to which the test
actual ly measu res what it was designed to measur e (24). Face
validity, content validity, and criterion validity, defined next, are
secondary to and provide evidence for construct validity. Within
construct validity, there are two important subtypes: convergent
validity  and discriminant validity . Both are crucial in the
development and evaluation of measur ement tools. Convergent
validity is evidenced by high positive correlations between  results of
the test being assessed and those of the recogniz ed measure of the
construct (the “gold standar d”). A test may be preferable to the gold
standar d if it exhibi ts convergent validity with the standar d but is
less demanding in terms of time, equipment, expense, or expertise.
Convergent validity would be demonstr ated if scores on the 1RM
back squat test and the isometric squat test (requiring force plate
technology) are highly correlated, indicating that both tests are
effectively measuring the same underlying construct (lower body
strength).
Discriminant validity is the ability of a test to distinguish between
two different constructs and is evidenced by a low correlation
between the results of the test and those of tests of a different
construct (2). Discriminant validity would be establ ished if scores on
the 1RM back squat test do not show a correlation with V̇O2max
scores, indicating that the squat test is specifically measuring
strength and not endur ance (two di fferent constructs).
Face Validity
Face validity  is the appear ance to the athlete and other casual
observ ers that the test measur es what it is purported to measur e. If
a test or test item has face validity, the athlete is more likely to
respond to it positively (1). The assessment of face validity is
737
gener ally informal and nonquanti tative. In other fields, such as
psychology , tests may be deliberately constructed to have poor face
validity because if examinee s realize what a test or test item is
supposed to measur e, they can answer deceptiv ely to manipulate
their scores. For tests of basic athletic abilities, howev er, face validity
is desirable based on the assumption that anyone taking a test of
physical ability wants to do well and is thus motiv ated by a test that
appears to measur e a relevant capabi lity.
Content Validity
Content validity  is the assessment by experts that the testing
covers all relevant subtopics or component abilities in appropriate
proportions (1). For athletic testing, these include all the component
abilities needed for a particular sport or sport position. Examples of
component abilities in athletics are jumping ability, sprinting ability,
and lower body strength (37). For example, a test battery for
potential soccer players should include, at minimum, tests of
sprinting speed, agility, aerobic endur ance, and kicking power . To
ensur e content validity, the test developer should list the ability
components to be assessed and make sure they are all represented
on the test. In addition, the proportion of the total score attributable
to a particula r component ability should be proportio nal to the
importance of that componen t to total performance. While the terms
face validity and content validity are sometimes used
interchangeably , the latter relates to actual validity while the former
relates to the appear ance of v alidity to nonexperts (1).
Criterion Validity
Criterion validity  is the extent to which test scores are associated
with some other measur e of the same ability. There are two types of
criterion v alidity: concurr ent and pr edictiv e.
Concurrent validity  is the extent to which test scores are
associated with those of other accepted tests that measur e the same
ability. Criterion validity is often estimated statistical ly. For example,
738
a Pearson product –moment correlation coefficient based on the
scores on a new body fat assessment device and those from dual-
energy X-ray absorptiometry would provide a measur e of the
concurr ent validity of the new test.
Predictive validity  is the extent to which the test score
corresponds with future behavior or performance. This can be
measur ed through comparison of a test score with some measur e of
success in the sport itself. For example, one could calculate the
statistical correlation between the overall score on a battery of tests
used to assess potential for basketball and a measur emen t of actual
basketball performance as indicated by a composi te of such
quanti ties as points scored, rebounds, assists, blocked shots, forced
turno vers, and steals.
Reliability
Reliability  is a measur e of the degree of consistency or
repeatabi lity of a test (2, 8). If an athlete whose ability does not
change is measur ed two times and achiev es the same score, the test
is perfectly reliable. With an unreliable test, an individual could
obtain a high score on one day and a low score on another . A test
must be reliable to be valid, because highly variable results have
little meaning.  Howev er, even a reliable test may not be valid,
because the test may not measure what it is supposed to measur e.
For example, both the 60-meter (66 yard) sprint and the 1.5-mi le
(2.4 km) run are reliable field tests, but only the 1.5-mi le run is
consider ed a valid field test for aerobic fitness. It is also possible for
a test to be highly reliable for one group (e.g., college tennis
players) but only moder ately reliable for another group (e.g., grade
school tennis players) because of differences in physical or emotional
maturi ty and ski ll level, which can af fect test perf ormance.
There are several ways to determine the reliability of a test; the
most obvious one is to admin ister the same test several times to the
same group of athletes. Statistical correlation, such as the
intraclass-correlation coefficient , of the scores from two test
739
administr ations provides a measur e of test–retest reliability . Any
difference between the two sets of scores represents measur ement
error. Another statistic that can be calculated is the typical error of
measurement  (TE), which includes both the equipment error and
biological variation of athletes (18). The difference between two sets
of scor es can arise f rom a number of di fferent factors (2):
Intrasubject (wi thin subjects) v ariabi lity
Lack of interr ater (between r aters) r eliability or agr eement
Intrarater (wi thin raters) v ariabi lity
Failure of the test i tself to pr ovide consistent r esults
Reliability is a measure of the degree of consistency or
repeatability of a test. A test must be reliable to be
valid, because highly variable results have little
meaning.
Intrasubject variability  is a lack of consistent performance by
the person being tested. Interrater reliability , also referred to as
objectivity  or interrater agreement  (2), is the degree to which
different raters agree in their test results over time or on repeated
occasions; it is a measur e of consistency . A clearly defined scoring
system and competent scorers who are trained and experienced with
the test are essential to enhance interr ater reliability. For example,
even a test that appears simple, such as timing a 40-yard (37 m)
sprint with a stopw atch, can exhibi t both random and systematic
error if the timer is not trained and experienced. Sprint times
obtained using handheld stopwatches are typical ly shorter than
those obtaine d using automatic timers, because raters using
stopw atches exhibi t reaction-time delay when pressing the start
button in response to the gun but do not delay in pressing the
button at the finish line because they can see the athlete
approaching. Interrater reliability is particularly important if different
scorers administer tests to different subgr oups of athletes. A
subgr oup with a relatively lenient scorer will have artificially inflated
740
scores. To get an accurate measur e of improvement, the same
scorer should test a group at the beginning and the end of the
training period. If there are two scorers and the scorer at the
beginning is more or less lenient than the scorer at the end, the
resulting measurements may be worthless for compar ative purposes.
Consider a situation in which  an athlete is tested in the squat. If the
pretest scorer is more lenient (requiring less depth on the squat)
than the posttest scorer, the athlete may achiev e a lower test score
on the posttest despite having made a significant improvement in
strength.
Sources of interr ater differences include variations in calibrating
testing devices, preparing athletes, and running the test. Different
testers may motiv ate athletes to different degrees, based on factors
such as personal ity, status, physical appear ance, demeanor , and sex.
A common scenario that increases interr ater variabi lity occurs when
the strength and condi tioning  professional tests some of the athletes
while an assistant tests others. The athletes may be inspired to do
better on the tests administer ed by the strength and condi tioning
professional.
The Scientific Process
Strength and condi tioning professional s should establ ish a sound scienti fic process
when it comes to selecting, administering, interpr eting, and applying physical tests
with their athletes. The scienti fic process of testing should begin with identi fying
clear questions that physical testing can answer , based on observ ations specific to
the context of the athlete and his or her sport. Without establ ishing clear questions
(the rationale) for physical testing, there is a risk of testing athletes for the sake of
it, which is both inefficient and poten tially unethical. A proposed framework for
scienti fic process of physical test selection, with an example of a common
performance question, is shown in figure 13.1 .
741
Figure 13.1 A proposed framework for the scientific process of physical test
selection.
Intrarater variability  is the lack of consistent scores by a given
tester . This differs from interr ater reliability, which refers to the
degree of agreement between different testers. For example, a
strength and condi tioning professional eager to see improvement
may unintentio nally be more lenient on a posttest than on a pretest.
Other causes of intrarater variabi lity include inadequate training;
inattentiv eness; lack of concentr ation; or failure to follow
standar dized procedur es for device calibration, athlete preparation,
test administr ation, or test scoring. To avoid such problems, accurate
and consistent athletic testing should be a priority for all strength
and condi tioning pr ofessionals.
Finally, sometimes the test itself might fail to provide consistent
results. This may occur if a physical performance test requires a
technique in which the athlete has not developed consistency . More
technique-intensiv e tests gener ally exhibi t greater variabi lity in
results and r equire mor e pretest pr actice to pr oduce consistency .
742
Test Selection
When evaluati ng tests for high levels of validity and reliability, the
strength and condi tioning professional must rely on her or his
knowledge and practical experience with the sport. The strength and
condi tioning professional must consider sport specificity (e.g.,
metabol ic energy systems, biomechanical movement patterns),
athlete experience, training status, age, and environmental factors
when selecting tests.
When consider ing test selection, it is imper ative to classify the
exercises to be tested. The categorization of exercises facilitates the
creation of a compr ehensiv e testing battery that accurately evaluates
an athlete’s capabi lities across various movement patterns and
muscle groups. Understanding the classification system assists
strength and condi tioning professionals in designing targeted
training programs tailored to individual needs and goals. The
classification of exercises for assessment typical ly encompasses
several key dimensions of speci ficity:
Movement patterns. Exercises can be classified based on the
primary movement patterns they involve, such as pushing,
pulling, squat ting, hinging, rotating, and stabilizing (7, 8). Each
movement pattern places specific demands on the
musculosk eletal system and requires distinct biomecha nical
consider ations. By including tests that cover a spectrum of
movement patterns, practitioners can obtain a complete
understanding of an athlete’ s functional capabi lities.
Muscle groups targeted . Another crucial dimension for
classification is the muscle groups targeted during an exercise.
This classification helps identi fy potential muscle imbalances or
weaknesses that may predispose athletes to injury or limit
their perf ormance.
Primary energy system . Exercises can also be categoriz ed
based on the primary energy system they predomin antly
743
engage, such as the phosphagen system, glycolytic system, or
oxidativ e system. Different energy systems contribute to
various aspec ts of athletic performance, including power,
strength, and endur ance. Assessing performance across these
energy systems provides valuable insights into an athlete’ s
metabol ic capacity and helps tailor condi tioning strategies
accordingly .
Skill level and complexi ty. Exercise classification should also
consider the skill level and complexi ty involved in performing a
particular movement. Basic compound movements like squats,
deadl ifts, and presses may serve as foundational tests for
assessing gener al strength and movement proficiency .
Conversely , more advanced or sport-speci fic movements
require greater neuromuscular coordination and may be
included to ev aluate athletic pr owess in speci fic contexts.
By systematical ly categorizing exercises based on these
dimensions, strength and condi tioning professionals can construct a
targeted testing battery that effectively evaluates an athlete’ s
strength, power, endur ance, and movement quality. This
compr ehensiv e approach not only identi fies areas of improvement
but also guides the development of evidence-base d training
programs aimed at optimizing athletic performance and reducing the
risk of injury . Table 13.1 details common tests used to assess
physical char acteristics of v arious sports.
Metabolic Energy System Specificity
A valid test must emulate the energy requirements of the sport for
which ability is being assessed. Thus, the strength and conditioning
professional should have a thorough understanding of the basic
energy systems (phosphagen, glycolytic, and oxidativ e) and their
interr elationships in order to apply the principle of specificity when
choosing or designing valid tests to measur e athletic ability for
specific sports  (10, 13, 19, 36). For example, in choosing an
appropriate test for running ability in basketball, the strength and
744
condi tioning professional must understand that basketball is
predominantly an anaer obic running sport (4, 26) and also be
familiar with the distances and directions of sprints in a basketball
game. It is best for the tests to simulate the physical movements
and ener gy demands of a r eal game.
TABLE 13.1  Common Tests Used to Assess Physical
Characteristics of Various Sports
Physical
characteristic Test nameSport
application
examples Description
Aerobic capaci tyYo-Yo intermi ttent
recovery testSoccer, hock ey Measur es aer obic fi tness and
ability to r ecover between bouts
of high-intensi ty exercise
V̇O2max test Aerobic
endur ance
sportsMeasur es maximum o xygen
uptak e during incr emental
exercise, indicating aer obic
endur ance capaci ty
Agility T-test Soccer,
basketball,
American
footbal lAssesses agi lity by measuring
the time tak en to na vigate a T -
shaped course
Illinois test Soccer, rugb y,
American
footbal lMeasur es agi lity and speed b y
timing the perf ormance thr ough
a set course wi th changes of
direction
Anaer obic
capaci tyWingate anaer obic
testCycling, hock eyAssesses anaer obic power and
capaci ty by measuring power
output on a cy cle er gometer
over 30 s
Anthr opometry Height, body mass,
arm span,
circumferences, and
limb lengthsGener al Measur es the dimensions and
proportions of the human body
Balance and
stabilityBalance err or
scoring system
(BESS)Gener al Assesses static balance b y
counting err ors during six 20-s
stance condi tions perf ormed on
firm and f oam surf aces, wi th
745
Physical
characteristic Test nameSport
application
examples Description
errors including opening ey es,
lifting hands f rom hips, stepping
or stumbl ing, or mo ving f rom
the test posi tion
Star ex cursion
balance test (SEB T)Gener al Evaluates dynamic balance and
neuromuscular contr ol by
having individuals maintain
single-leg stance whi le reaching
with their f ree leg in eight
different dir ections arr anged in
a star pat tern, measuring their
maximum r each distance in
each dir ection
Body
composi tionAir displacement
plethysmogr aphyGener al Measur es body composi tion b y
calculating body v olume and
density through the
displacement of air in a sealed
chamber (e.g. , the B od Pod
device)
Bioelectrical
impedanceGener al Estimates body f at by
measuring the r esistance to a
small electrical curr ent passed
through the body
Dual X -ray
absorptiometry
(DXA)Gener al Measur es body composi tion b y
using low -dose X -ray beams at
two di fferent ener gy lev els to
distinguish between bone, f at
tissue, and lean mass
throughout the body
Skinfolds Gener al Estimates body f at per centage
by using cal ipers to measur e
subcutaneous f at thickness at
specific sites on the body , which
are then enter ed into pr ediction
equations
Underw ater
weighingGener al Measur es body composi tion b y
submer ging a person in w ater
and using their underw ater
746
Physical
characteristic Test nameSport
application
examples Description
weight to calculate body densi ty
and estimate body f at
percentage based on
Archimedes’ principle
Flexibi lity Sit and r each Gener al Assesses hamstring and lower
back flexibi lity by measuring
how f ar a person can r each
forward whi le sitting wi th legs
extended
Overhead squat Gener al Used as a part of mo vement
screens to assess bi lateral
mobility of hips, knees, and
ankles along wi th shoulder and
thoracic spine
Muscular
endur ancePlank Gener al Measur es cor e strength and
endur ance b y maintaining a
plank posi tion for as long as
possible
Push-up Gener al Measur es upper body muscular
endur ance b y completing as
many repetitions as possible in
a certain time or to the point of
exhaustion
Maximum
muscular powerVertical jump Basketball,
volleybal l,
American
footbal lMeasur es lower body explosiv e
power b y the height achiev ed in
a vertical jump
Standing long jump Track and field,
American
footbal lMeasur es horiz ontal explosiv e
power b y the distance jumped
from a standing posi tion
1RM power clean Weightl ifting,
track and field,
rugby, American
footbal lAssesses the maximum weight
that can be l ifted during the
power clean ex ercise
Maximum
muscular1RM f or the upper
body (e.g. , benchAmerican
footbal l, rugb y,Measur es maximal upper body
strength b y determining the
747
Physical
characteristic Test nameSport
application
examples Description
strength press or bench pul l)powerl ifting maximum weight that can be
lifted once
1RM f or the lower
body (e.g. , back
squat, f ront squat,
deadl ift)American
footbal l, rugb y,
powerl iftingMeasur es maximal lower body
strength b y determining the
maximum weight that can be
lifted once
Isometric mid-thigh
pullWeightl ifting,
track and field,
American
footbal l, rugb yAssesses maximal isometric
strength b y pulling on an
immo vable bar
Speed 40-yard (37 m)
sprintAmerican
footbal l, rugb yMeasur es sprinting speed o ver a
specific distance
Biomechanical Movement Pattern
Specificity
All else being equal, the more similar the test is to an important
movement in the sport, the better. Sports differ in their physical
demands. For example, the vertical jump test is very specific to
basketball and volleybal l, both of which involve vertical jumping
during play, but less relevant to hockey, which does not involve
vertical jumpin g. Positions within a sport differ as well. An American
footbal l defensive lineman needs pushing strength to move opposing
linemen out of the way and 5- to 15-yard (5 to 14 m) sprint speed to
reach the opposing quarterback, while a wide receiver depends less
on pushing strength but must be able to sprint 30 to 100 yards (27-
91 m) quickly . Thus, the bench press and 10-yard (9 m) sprint test
would be more relevant to the lineman, while sprint tests of 30 to
100 y ards (27-91 m) would be mor e relevant to the wide r eceiver.
For a test to be valid, it must emulate the energy
requirements and important movements of the sport for
which ability is being tested.
748
Experience and Training Status
For a well-trained, experienced athlete, a technique-intensiv e test
may be appropriate because it can be very sport specific, and one
can assume that poor technique will not impair performance of the
test. Howev er, this assumption cannot be made for an athlete just
learning or trying out for a sport. The number of single-leg hops
needed to travel 27 yards (25 m) may represent a valid and reliable
test of plyometric strength for an experienced long jumper but not
for a no vice (11).
Testers must also consider the training status of the athletes
being tested. It would not be ideal, for example, to ask a basebal l
player to perform a 3-mile (4.8 km) run test a week before the
beginning of fall practice, because the player has probably been
doing interv al training and relatively short runs (32). A lower body
strength test using the parallel squat would not be an ideal test for
an athlete who has tr ained using the leg pr ess ex clusiv ely.
Age and Sex
Both age and sex can affect the validity and reliability of a test. For
example, the 1.5-mi le (2.4 km) run may be a valid and reliable field
test of aerobic power for college-aged men and women (21) but
may not be appropriate for preadolescents because of their probable
lack of experience and interest in sustained running (30). A test of
the maximum number of chin-ups that can be performed may be a
valid test of elbow flexion muscular endur ance for male wrestlers,
but it may not be as valid for females due to differences in upper
body pulling strength (27). The test may not be capable of
differentiating muscular endur ance levels in females. Therefore,
using a modified prone pull-up with the feet supported may be a
more valid test.
Environmental Factors
It is necessar y to consider the environment when selecting and
administering tests of basic athletic ability. High ambient
749
temper ature, especial ly in combination with high humidity, can
impair endur ance exercise performance, pose health risks, and lower
the validity of an aerobic endur ance exercise test. Aerobic endur ance
performance (29, 35) and intermi ttent sprint performance (17) may
be impair ed when the temper ature approaches 80 °F (27 °C),
especial ly if the humidi ty exceeds 50% (20). The effects of
temper ature and humidi ty on testing performance can create
problems for comparing the results of tests administer ed at different
times of year, on different days, and even at different times of day.
For example, the maximal oxygen uptak e of an athlete impair ed by
the heat is underestimated by the 1.5-mi le (2.4 km) run test. Run
times can also be impair ed by cold temper atures. Thus, outdoor
aerobic endur ance tests may be inappr opriate at locations
characteriz ed by wide fluctuations in temper ature. In such places,
aerobic endur ance tests can be administer ed on an indoor track, if
available, or wi th a tr eadmi ll or stationary cy cle.
Altitude can also impair performance on aerobic endur ance tests,
although not on tests of strength and power (24). Norms on aerobic
endur ance tests should be adjusted when testing at altitudes
exceeding 1,900 feet (579 m). Up to about 9,000 feet (2,743 m),
maximal oxygen uptak e declines by approximately 5% for each
3,000 feet (914 m) of elevation (25). At even higher altitudes,
maximal oxygen uptak e declines more sharply . Athletes who arrive
at a relatively high altitude after living near sea level for an extended
period of time should be given at least 10 days to acclimate before
under going aerobic endur ance tests (34). For all testing,  it is good
practice to measur e and document the environmental condi tions and
then to consider these f actors when interpr eting the r esults.
Athletes’ experience, training status, age, and sex can
affect test performance, so these factors should be
considered in test selection. Environmental factors such
as temperature, humidity, and altitude can also
influence test performan ce, so testers should try to
750
standardize environmen tal conditions as much as
possible.
751
Test Administration
To achiev e accurate test results, tests must be administer ed safely,
correctly, and in an organized manner . Strength and condi tioning
professionals should ensur e the health and safety of athletes; testers
should be carefully selecte d and trained; tests should be well
organized and administer ed efficiently; and athletes should be
properly pr epared and instructed.
Health and Safety Considerations
Even though all athletes should be medical ly cleared before being
permi tted to physical ly train and compete, the strength and
condi tioning professional must be aware of testing condi tions that
can threaten the health of athletes and be observ ant of signs and
symptoms of health problems that warrant exclusion from testing
(5). The strength and condi tioning professional must remain
attentiv e to the health status of athletes, especial ly before, during,
and after maximal exertions that occur during training, testing, and
competi tion. Strenuous exercise, such as maximal runs or 1-
repetition maximum (1RM) tests, can uncover or worsen existing
heart problems, such as impair ed blood flow to the heart muscle and
irregular heartbeats. Standar d medical screening cannot always
reveal hidden heart problems, which occasional ly result in fatality
among young athletes (30). Heat injury is also a risk during heavy
physical exertion in hot environments, especial ly when humidi ty is
high. Athletes should wear light clothing in warm weather and drink
water ad libitum according to the dictates of thirst before and during
heavy physical exertion in the heat (refer to chapters 10 and 11 for
more detailed hydration guidel ines). Musculosk eletal injuries can also
be a problem.  If symptoms are ignored, recovery can be greatly
delayed.
Medical referral may be warranted for an athlete who persistently
has any of the following symptoms: chest pressure, pain, or
discomf ort; listlessness; light-headedness; dizziness; confusion;
752
headache; deeply reddened or cold and clamm y skin; irregular
pulse; bone or joint pain; blurred vision; nausea; or shortness of
breath, rapid pulse, or weakn ess either not commensur ate with the
level of exertion or unresponsiv e to rest. Such symptoms can occur
long after exercise is terminated. Even symptoms that occur only
once, if severe (such as loss of consciousness), call for immediate
medical at tention.
When aerobic endur ance exercise tests are being administer ed in
a hot environment, caution must be observ ed to protect both the
health and safety of the athlete and the validity of the test. Figure
13.2 lists temper ature limits at various ranges of relative humidi ty for
strenuous exercise testing, and the sidebar lists guidel ines for
aerobic endur ance testing in the heat.
FIGURE 13.2 Temper ature limits at various ranges of relative humidi ty for strenuous
exercise testing.
Data from McArdle et al. (2023).
Aerobic Endurance Testing in the Heat
Follow these guidel ines to minimiz e health risks and obtain accurate results when
testing athletes in hot en vironments (9, 23, 30):
753
During the weeks before the test, athletes should engage in enough training
to establ ish a baseline of fitness in the activity being tested. Strength and
condi tioning professionals should be aware that responses to exercise in the
heat ar e highly individual.
Avoid testing under extreme combinat ions of heat and humidi ty. Figure 13.2
illustrates the combinations of temper ature and humidi ty at which heat injury
risk is pr esent.
Using temper ature limits of at least 5 °F (3 °C) below those listed is
recommended, especially on sunny days, to provide a safety margin and
enable better test performance. On days when the temper ature has exceeded
or is expected to exceed the recommended limits, indoor facilities should be
used if available, or testing should be conducted during morning or early
evening hours when temper atures are acceptable.
The athletes, especial ly those coming from cool climates, should be
acclimated to the heat and humidi ty for at least one week before testing.
Start wi th short work outs and pr ogress to work outs of longer dur ation.
Athletes should make sure they are well hydrated in the 24-hour period
preceding aerobic endur ance testing  in the heat. A good indication of
adequate hydration is a plenti ful volume of clear urine (refer to chapter 10 for
more detailed preexercise hydration guidel ines). Salt tablets should gener ally
be avoided.
Athletes should be encour aged to drink during exercise in the heat. Plain
water is most appropriate for exercise up to 1 hour in duration. Snack breaks
during longer durations of training can help replenish fluids and be important
in replacin g electr olytes. The amount and rate of fluid replacement depend
on individ ual sweat rates, duration of exercise, and environment. Refer to
chapter 10  for speci fic guidel ines and how to calculate sweat r ate if needed.
Athletes should wear a light-color ed, loose-fi tting tank top and shorts that are
breathable (i.e., synthetic porous, moistur e-wicking material). Male athletes
may be al lowed to go shirtless.
Heart r ate ma y be moni tored to detect r eactions to the heat.
Be attentive to possible symptoms of heatstr oke or heat exhaustion: cramps,
nausea, dizziness, difficulty in walking or standing, faintness, garbled speech,
lack of sweat, r ed or ashen skin, and goose bumps.
Be aware of the symptoms of hyponatr emia or water intoxication, a
potential ly fatal condi tion in which excess water intake reduces blood sodium
to danger ously low levels. Symptoms may include extremely diluted urine in
combination with bloated skin, altered consciousness, or loss of
consciousness, with no increase in body temper ature. A victim of
hyponatr emia should never be given fluid and should be treated by a
physician.
Proficient medical coverage should be readily available so that an athlete
encountering a test-related health problem can be very rapidly treated or
754
evacuated (or both).
Selection and Training of Testers
Test administr ators should be well trained and should have a
thorough understanding of all testing procedur es and protocols. The
testing supervisor should make sure that all novice personnel
perform and score all tests correctly, as in timing sprint speed with a
stopw atch or determining a 1RM back squat. It is essential that all
testers have sufficient practice so that the scores they obtain
correlate closely with those produced by experienced and reliable
personnel. The testers should be trained to explain and administer
the tests as consistently as possible. Test reliability is impair ed, for
example, if one test administr ator provides consider able verbal
encour agement to a group of athletes while another tester provides
no verbal encour agement to another group. Administr ators should
have a checkl ist of materials needed for testing and written test
protocols to r efer to i f questions arise during the testing pr ocess.
Recording Forms
Scoring forms, whether paper based or digital, should be developed
before the testing session and should have space for all test results
and comments. Factors such as environmental condi tions should be
documented. The specific details of setup for the testing should also
be noted. For example, for a 1RM squat, the tester can note the pin
height that was used for the barbel l. This allows test time to be used
more efficiently and r educes the incidence of r ecording err ors.
Test Format
A well-organized testing session, in which the athletes are aware of
the purpose and procedur es of the testing, will enhance the
reliability of test measur es. Reliable measur es obtained from valid
tests are a great asset in assessing fitness levels and evaluating
changes o ver a period of time.
755
Test planning must address such issues as whether athletes will
be tested all at once or in groups and whether the same person will
administer a given test to all athletes. The main consider ation here is
the number of athletes that are being tested. It is preferable to have
the same person administer a given test if time and schedules
permi t, becaus e this eliminates the issue of interr ater reliability. If
this is not feasible, the test supervisor can allow simple, well-defined
tests (e.g., counting correct push-ups) to be administer ed by
different testers and tests requiring schooled judgment (as of proper
form in the squat) to be scored by the most skilled and experienced
personnel. As a rule, each tester should administer only one test at a
time, especial ly when the tests require complex judgments. It is
permissible to have one tester alternate between two testing
stations to avoid wasting time as athletes get ready. Howev er, the
tester must focus on only one test at a time. Planning and practicing
the testing sessions beforehand will go a long way toward ensuring
an efficiently run testing session.
Testing Batteries and Multiple Testing
Trials
When time is limited and the group of athletes is large, duplicate
test setups may be emplo yed to make efficient use of testing time.
For example, when one is conducting the 300-yard (274 m) shuttle,
two test cours es can be set up (16). A tester can administer up to
two nonfatigui ng tests in sequence to an athlete as long as test
reliability can be maintained.  For example, at a two-test lower body
power station staffed by only one tester , the athlete can perform the
vertical jump test and the static jump test immediately afterw ard.
When multiple trials of a test (e.g., the repeated trials it takes to
find a 1RM) or a battery of tests is performed, allow complete
recovery betwe en trials (31). There should be at least 2 minutes of
rest between attempts that are not close to the athlete’ s maximum
and 3 minutes between attempts that are close to the maximum, as
judged by the relative difficulty of the previous trial or testing set
756
(21). When administering a test battery  (e.g., one in which
wrestlers perform maximal repetition pull-up and push-up tests for
assessment of local muscular endur ance), tests should be separ ated
by at least 5 minutes to prevent the effects of fatigue from
confounding test results (also see the following section, Sequence of
Tests).
Sequence of Tests
Knowledge of exercise science can help determine the proper order
of tests and the duration of rest periods between tests to ensur e test
reliability. The fundamental principle with test sequencing should be
that one test should not affect the performance of a subsequent
test. This should allow for optimal performance in each test and also
allows for valid comparisons with previous testing results. For
example, a test that maximal ly taxes the phosphagen energy system
requires 3 to 5 minutes of rest for complete recovery (6, 12),
whereas a maximal test of the anaer obic glycolytic energy system
requires at least 1 hour for complete recovery (10). Therefore, tests
requiring high-ski ll movements, such as agility tests, should be
administer ed before tests that are likely to produce fatigue and
confound the results of subsequent tests. A logical sequence,
although there are some variations, is to administer tests in this
order:
1. Nonfatiguing tests (e.g., height, weight, flexibi lity, skinfolds
and girth measur ements, v ertical jump)
2. Agility tests (e.g. , T-test, 5-10-5 test, 5-0-5 test, Il linois test)
3. Maximum power and strength tests (e.g., 1RM power clean,
1RM squat, 1RM bench pr ess)
4. Sprint tests (e.g., 40 m sprint with split times at 10 m and 20
m)
5. Local muscular endur ance tests (e.g., push-up test, partial
curl-up , YMCA bench pr ess test)
757
6. Fatiguing anaer obic capaci ty tests (e.g., 300-yard [274 m]
shuttle, 90 s bo x hop test)
7. Aerobic capaci ty tests (e.g., 1.5-mi le [2.4 km] run, 12-minute
run test, Yo-Yo intermi ttent recovery test, maximal aerobic
speed test, and 30-15 intermi ttent fi tness test)
The test order should also be designed to require minimal
recovery time between tests, allowing for a more efficient testing
session. An effort should be made to administer fatiguing anaer obic
capaci ty tests and aerobic tests on a different day than the other
tests. However, if performed on the same day, these tests should be
performed last, after an extended r est period.
It is important  that test sessions be conducted at the same time
of day to avoid fluctuation s in physiological response s due to
differences in circadian rhythm (33). It is also recommended that
tests be conducted indoors, which will allow for climate and testing
surfaces to r emain mor e consistent.
The order of tests should be designed in such a way that
the completion of one test does not adversely affect
performance in subsequent tests.
Preparing Athletes for Testing
The date, time, and purpose of a test battery should be announced
in advance to allow athletes to prepare physical ly and mental ly. To
maximiz e test reliability, athletes should be familiar with test content
and procedur es. Athletes should also be in a state of readiness  to
perform. Athlete readiness has been defined as “the state of being
fully prepared to train and perform physical ly and mental ly” (3). A
short, supervised pretest practice or familiarization session one to
three days before the test, in which the athletes exert themselv es at
somewhat less than full intensi ty, is often beneficial for athletes who
either have never participated  in the test before or have not done so
for a long time. One strategy to promote test familiarization among
758
athletes could be to incorp orate familiarization of the tests into
preceding training sessions, even if only as part of their dynamic
warm-up .
The instructions should cover the purpose of the test, how it is to
be performed, the amount of warm-up recommended, the number
of practice attempts allowed, the number of trials, test scoring,
criteria for disallowing attempts, and recommendations for
maximizing performance. The instructions that are given to the
athletes need to be clear and concise because this will increase the
reliability and objectivi ty of the test (25).
As an important supplement to reading test instructions aloud,
the test administr ator or a competent assistant should demonstr ate
proper test performance when possible. The athletes should be
given opportuni ties to ask questions before and after the
demonstr ation. The test administrator should anticipate questions
and have answers prepared. It is important to motiv ate all athletes
equal ly rather than giving special encour agement to only some.
Whenev er possible, tell athletes their test scores immediately after
each trial to motivate them to perform better on subsequent trials
(2).
Reliability of testing improves with pretest warm-up (2). An
appropriately organized warm-up consists of a gener al warm-up
followed by a specific warm-up. Both types of warm-ups include
body movements similar to those involved in the test. An organized,
instructor -led gener al warm-up ensur es uniformity. It is acceptable
to allow two or three activity-speci fic warm-up trials, depending on
the test protocol, and have subsequent trials actual ly count toward
the score. Depending on the test protocol, the score can be the best
or the a verage of the post -warm-up trials (2).
General and specific warm-ups performed before a test
can increase the test’s reliability.
759
Administer a supervised cool-down period to athletes following
tests that dramatical ly increase heart rate and at the completion of
the test battery. For exampl e, after the 300-yard (274 m) shuttle,
the athlete should not sit or lie down; active recovery using low-
intensi ty movement and light stretching will enhance the recovery
process (10).
760
Conclusion
Tests and measur ements can be used to assess athletic talent,
identi fy physical capaci ties in need of improvement, provide
reference values to evaluate the effectiveness of a training program,
and set realistic training goals. To optimiz e test quality, testers must
understand and consider validity and reliability. Test selection
involves consid eration of the physiological energy system s required
by the sport; movement specificity; and the athletes’ experience,
training status, age, and sex. Testers must also consider
environmental factors such as temper ature, humidi ty, and altitude
before adminis tering tests. Strength and condi tioning professionals
must always remain consciou s of potential health risks during testing
and attentiv e to signs and symptoms of possible health problems
that require medical referral. Testers must be carefully selected and
well trained, and the testin g session must be well planned and
organized using the appropriate testing sequence. Consistent and
effective preparation of athletes f or testing is essential.
KEY TERMS
concurr ent validity
construct v alidity
content v alidity
convergent v alidity
criterion v alidity
discriminant v alidity
evaluation
face validity
field test
formativ e evaluation
interr ater agr eement
interr ater r eliability
intraclass-corr elation coef ficient
761
intrarater v ariabi lity
intrasubject v ariabi lity
measur ement
midtest
monitoring
objectivi ty
posttest
predictiv e validity
pretest
readiness
reliability
talent identi fication
test
test bat tery
test–retest r eliability
typical err or of measur ement
validity
STUDY QUESTIONS
  1.  R egular assessment through evidence-based testing is
important for monitoring progress in athletes because of which
of the f ollowing r easons?
  a.  It ensur es the athlete maintains a consistent tr aining
routine.
  b.  It pr ovides subjectiv e feedback f rom the athlete about
their f eelings.
  c.  It al lows coaches to tr ack changes and mak e data-driv en
program modi fication.
  d.  It guar antees immediate impr ovement in athletic
performance.
  2.  R eliability is crucial in test selection because it ensur es that
the test does which of the f ollowing?
  a.  cr eates a chal lenge f or the athlete
762
  b.  produces consistent r esults over mul tiple trials
  c.  pr ovides a w ay to quickly administer the test
  d.  reduces the expense of the test
  3.  Which of the following tests is most appropriate for assessing
aerobic endur ance in a soc cer pla yer?
  a.  1RM bench pr ess
  b.  40-yard sprint
  c.  V̇O2max test
  d.  v ertical jump
  4.  When assessing the validity of a test, which aspect is the most
critical?
  a.  abi lity to be r epeated consistently
  b.  alignment wi th the sport -speci fic demands
  c.  af fordability and ease of implementation
  d.  capaci ty to ac commodate lar ge groups
  5.  To evaluate an athlete’ s lower body power , which of the
following tests would most accurately provide valid results for
this purpose?
  a.  T-test
  b.  vertical jump
  c.  40- yard sprint
  d.  1RM deadl ift
763