# Section 15.4

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 15: Performance Preparation, Mobility, and Flexibility

**Section:** 15.4 -- Program Design Considerations

**PDF Pages:** 921--946

1. Lie supine with the knees flexed to approximately 90 degrees
and the f eet hip- width apart and flat on the floor .
2. Pushing the feet into the floor and squeezing the glutes, lift the
hips up toward the ceiling until the body attains a straight-line
postur e.
3. Hold f or a second and then r eturn the hips to the floor .
4. The action can use a single leg as an alternativ e to a double
leg.
MUSCLES AFFECTED
gluteus maximus, hamstrings, erector spinae
COMMON ERROR
Using an excessive range of motion and hyperextending
the lower back
  26  INCHWORM
1. Stand er ect wi th the f eet placed shoulder -width apart.
2. While slightly flexing the knees, flex forward at the waist and
place hands shoulder -width apart flat on the floor .
3. The weight of the body should be shifted back (i.e., not directly
over the hands), with the buttocks high in the air—imagine
making an in verted V wi th the body .
4. Move the hands alternately forward, as if taking short steps
with the hands, unti l the body is in a push-up posi tion.
921
5. Walk the legs to the hands using small steps while keeping the
knees sl ightly flex ed.
6. Repeat the motion o ver a pr escribed distance.
MUSCLES AFFECTED
erector spinae, gastrocnemius, gluteus maximus,
hamstrings, soleus, anterior tibialis
COMMON ERRORS
Rushing the exercise
Failing to maintain postural integrity through the
movement
  27  QUADRUPED REACH AND ROTATE
1. Assume a quadruped posi tion.
2. Raise the left hand and extend the hand under the body,
reaching as f ar to the right as possible.
3. Reverse the action, pulling the left hand back to the beginning
position before pulling the arm back and turning the body away
from the support arm.
4. Keep the lumbar spine in a neutral position so that the action
occurs mainly in the thor acic spine.
5. Carry out the action in a slow and contr olled manner .
6. Repeat on the other side.
922
MUSCLES AFFECTED
obliques, erector spinae, rectus abdominis, levator
scapulae, subscapularis, rhomboids, serratus anterior,
subclavius, pectoralis major, pectoralis minor, latissimus
dorsi, medial deltoid
COMMON ERROR
Losing lumbar alignment to gain more range of motion
  28  LUNGE WALK
1. Stand erect with the feet parallel to each other and shoulder -
width apart.
2. Take an exagger ated step directly forward with the left leg,
planting the left f oot flat on the floor pointing str aight ahead.
3. Allow the left hip and knee to slowly flex, keeping the left knee
directly o ver the left f oot.
4. Slightly flex the right knee and lower it until it is 1 to 2 inches
(3-5 cm) above the floor; the right foot should be pointed
straight ahead.
923
5. Balance the weight evenly between the ball of the right foot
and the entir e left f oot.
6. Keep the torso perpendicular  to the floor by sitting back on the
right leg.
7. Forcefully push off of the floor by extending the left hip and
knee.
8. Pick up the right foot and place it next to the left foot; do not
stutter-step f orward.
9. Stand erect, pause, and then step forward with the right leg,
progressing f orward with each step .
MUSCLES AFFECTED
gluteus maximus, hamstrings, iliopsoas, quadriceps
COMMON ERROR
Not achieving the required position at the ankle, knee, hip,
and torso
  29  LATERAL LUNGE
1. Stand wi th the f eet hip- width apart and f eet facing f orward.
924
2. Take a relatively large lateral step with the right foot while
keeping the left f oot in contact wi th the floor .
3. Hinge at the hips, pushing the hips back, and flex the left hip
and knee, lowering the body toward the ground until the left
hip and knee are at approximately 90 degrees. The right knee
remains f ully extended as the left knee and hip flex.
4. Keep the body aligned within the base of support, and do not
lean f orward.
5. Return to the beginning position and then either repeat for the
desired numbe r of repetitions on the same leg or alternat e legs
for the desir ed number of r epetitions.
MUSCLES AFFECTED
quadriceps, hip adductors, hip abductors, gluteus
maximus, gluteus medius
COMMON ERRORS
Taking a step that is too small or too long
Losing the feet alignment
Not maintaining postural alignment
925
  30  LUNGE WALK WITH FRONT LEG
EXTENSION
1. Take an exagger ated step directly forward with the right leg and
assume a lunge stance, keeping the right knee directly over the
right foot and the rear (left) knee about an inch or so off the
floor ( note: this pr eparatory posi tion is not shown).
2. Flex the torso forward with the hands reaching toward the right
foot. From this position, lift the hips up and back, extending the
right knee to a fully (or nearly so) extended position. This will
cause the left knee to extend  as well and result in a stretch of
the hamstring muscles.
3. After the stretch is held, extend the torso to an erect position,
step the r ear (left) f oot forward, and r epeat on the other side.
MUSCLES AFFECTED
hamstrings, gluteus maximus, iliopsoas, quadriceps
COMMON ERROR
Losing postural integrity during the movement
  31  SPEED SKATER LUNGE
926
1. Assume an upright stance with feet hip-width apart and arms to
the side ( note: this pr eparatory posi tion is not shown).
2. Shift the body weight to the left foot and at the same time drop
the hips back and down, reaching the right leg behind the body
and as far as possible to the opposi te (right) side. The result is
a fully extended rear (right) knee and a contralater al (opposi te)
lateral reach of the other (left) arm.
3. Push back to the beginning position and repeat on the other
side.
4. For a more advanced exercise, the movement can be initiated
by a later al hop .
MUSCLES AFFECTED
quadriceps, gluteus maximus, gluteus medius, hip
adductors, hamstrings
COMMON ERRORS
Taking a step that is too small or too long
Losing postural integrity during the movement
927
  32  LUNGE WITH OVERHEAD SIDE
REACH
1. Stand erect with the feet parallel to each other and shoulder -
width apart.
2. Take an exagger ated step directly forward with the left leg,
planting the left f oot flat on the floor pointing str aight ahead.
3. Allow the left hip and knee to slowly flex, keeping the left knee
directly o ver the left f oot.
4. Slightly flex the right knee and lower it until it is 1 to 2 inches
(3-5 cm) above the floor; the right foot should be pointed
straight ahead.
5. Reach up high with the right arm and bend the torso laterally
toward the left leg.
6. Return to an erect torso position, and then forcefully push off
the floor b y extending the left hip and knee.
7. Pick up the right foot and place it next to the left foot; do not
stutter-step f orward.
8. Stand erect, pause, and then step forward with the right leg,
progressing f orward with each step .
MUSCLES AFFECTED
gluteus maximus, hamstrings, iliopsoas, latissimus dorsi,
internal and external oblique, rectus femoris
COMMON ERROR
Reaching too early before the lunge position has been
attained
928
  33  WALKING KNEE LIFT
1. Stand erect with the feet parallel to each other and shoulder -
width apart.
2. Step forward with the left leg and flex the right hip and knee to
move the right thigh upw ard tow ard the chest.
3. Grasp the front of the right knee or upper shin and use the
arms to pull the right knee up further and to squeez e the thigh
against the chest.
4. Dorsiflex the left f oot as the right hip and knee ar e flex ed.
5. Keeping the torso erect, pause for a moment, then proceed to
step down wi th the right leg.
6. Shift the body weight to the right leg and repeat the motion
with the left leg.
7. Progress forward with each step, increasing the ROM and speed
on subsequent steps.
929
MUSCLES AFFECTED
gluteus maximus, iliopsoas, quadriceps, hamstrings
COMMON ERROR
Leaning the torso backward to achieve ROM
  34  FORWARD LUNGE WITH ELBOW TO
INSTEP
1. Stand erect with the feet parallel to each other and shoulder -
width apart.
2. Take an exagger ated step directly forward with the left leg,
planting the left f oot flat on the floor pointing str aight ahead.
3. Allow the left hip and knee to slowly flex, keeping the left knee
directly o ver the left f oot.
930
4. Slightly flex the right knee and lower it until it is 1 to 2 inches
(3-5 cm) above the floor; the right foot should be pointed
straight ahead.
5. Lean forward, bringing the left arm forward and touching the
left elbow to the instep of the left foot; the right hand may be
placed on the floor to maintain balance.
6. Lean back to return to an erect torso position, and then
forcefully push of f the floor b y extending the left hip and knee.
7. Pick up the right foot and place it next to the left foot; do not
stutter-step f orward.
8. Stand erect, pause, and then step forward with the right leg,
progressing f orward with each step .
MUSCLES AFFECTED
biceps femoris, erector spinae, gastrocnemius, gluteus
maximus, hamstrings, iliopsoas, latissimus dorsi, internal
and external oblique, quadriceps, soleus
COMMON ERROR
Losing postural integrity in an attempt to achieve greater
ROM
931
  35  HEEL-TO-TOE WALK
1. Stand erect with the feet parallel to each other and shoulder -
width apart.
2. Take a small step forward with the right leg; place the heel of
the right foot on the ground first and then continue to dorsiflex
the foot.
3. Immediately roll forward and rise up as high as possible  onto
the bal l of the right f oot.
4. Swing the left leg f orward in or der to tak e another smal l step .
5. Repeat wi th the left leg, pr ogressing f orward with each step .
MUSCLES AFFECTED
gastrocnemius, soleus, anterior tibialis
COMMON ERROR
932
Failing to maintain a vertical posture and losing balance
36  WALKING OVER AND UNDER
1. Stand erect with the feet parallel to each other and shoulder -
width apart.
2. Flex the left hip and knee, and then abduct the left thigh until it
is par allel to the floor .
3. Step later ally to the left, stepping later ally over the first hur dle.
4. Place the left foot firmly on the ground, shift the body weight to
the left leg, and then proceed to lift the right leg over the first
hurdle.
5. After lifting the right leg over the hurdle and placing the right
foot firmly on the ground, stand erect, pause, and then flex the
hips and knees and dorsiflex the ankles to assume a full squat
position.
6. Extend the left leg later ally, as if perf orming a later al lunge.
7. Keeping the body weight low, move the body laterally, ducking
under the second hur dle.
933
8. Stand erect, pause, and repeat the motion in the opposi te
direction, ducking under the second hurdle and stepping over
the first.
Note:  If hurdles are not available, athletes can perform the exercise
by mirroring the motion of trying to step laterally and then under a
hurdle.
MUSCLES AFFECTED
hip abductors, hip adductors, gastrocnemius, gluteus
maximus, hamstrings, iliopsoas, rectus femoris, soleus
COMMON ERRORS
Leaning the torso backward to achieve ROM in the over
section
Flexing the torso forward rather than squatting to
achieve ROM in the under section
934
  37  INVERTED HAMSTRING STRETCH
1. Stand tal l and tak e a smal l step f orward with the left leg.
2. Flex at the w aist.
3. Reach forward with the left arm and simultaneously reach back
with the right leg.
4. Try to k eep the hips squar e.
5. Reach a position in which you feel a stretch in the hamstrings
but eventual ly aim to attain a position in which the body is
parallel to the floor .
6. Reach the right hand down tow ard the floor .
935
7. Return to the start by actively using the hamstrings and gluteals
of the planted leg.
8. Take a step f orward and r epeat on the other side.
MUSCLES AFFECTED
gluteus maximus, hamstrings, hip abductors, hip
adductors, erector spinae
COMMON ERROR
Performing the exercise too quickly and losing postural
integrity
936
  38  STRAIGHT-LEG MARCH
1. Assume a tall standing position with both arms outstr etched in
front of the chest.
2. Rise up onto the toes of the left leg and simultaneously , using a
straight-leg action, raise the right leg forward and up, aiming to
actively mo ve it through as lar ge a ROM as possible.
3. Once the highest point is reached, actively pull the leg back to
the beginning posi tion.
937
4. Maintain the tal l standing postur e throughout.
5. Repeat on al ternate legs whi le mo ving f orward.
MUSCLES AFFECTED
gluteus maximus, hamstrings, iliopsoas, rectus femoris
COMMON ERROR
Using excessive momentum to increase the ROM
  39  BEAR CRAWL
1. Assume a push-up posi tion.
2. Reach forward with the right arm and the left leg, moving the
body f orward in a cr awling motion.
3. Reach f orward with the opposi te leg and hand combination.
4. Keep the knees 1 to 2 inches (3-5 cm) of f the gr ound.
5. Repeat in a rhythmic manner for the desired distance or
repetitions.
938
6. As competency increases, the ROM can increase. Additional ly,
the cr awl can be perf ormed backw ard.
MUSCLES AFFECTED
erector spinae, gastrocnemius, gluteus maximus, deltoids,
iliopsoas, latissimus dorsi, internal and external oblique,
quadriceps
COMMON ERRORS
Positioning the hips too high
Moving the back out of a neutral position
  40  SPIDERMAN CRAWL
1. Assume a push-up position but with elbows flexed so that the
position is lower than normal.
2. Lift and external ly rotate the left leg, bringing the knee forward
at an angle outside the left elbow .
3. Walk the hands f orward and acr oss the body .
4. As this progresses, bring the right leg forward outside the right
hand and r epeat f or the giv en distance.
5. Repeat, al ternating sides, f or the r equired distance.
MUSCLES AFFECTED
939
biceps femoris, erector spinae, gastrocnemius, gluteus
maximus, hamstrings, iliopsoas, latissimus dorsi, internal
and external oblique, quadriceps, soleus
COMMON ERRORS
Positioning the hips too high
Moving the back out of a neutral position
PNF STRETCHING TECHNIQUES
  41  Calves  408
  42  Chest   408
  43  Groin  408
  44  Quadriceps and Hip Flex ors  409
  45  Shoulders   409
Guidelines a nd Precautions for PNF
Stretching
Decide on the muscle to be stretched, the ROM needed for the activity, and
whether PNF methods ar e best sui ted.
Decide on the stretch to be performed and the type of PNF stretching best
suited to the si tuation.
Communicate clearly wi th your partner bef ore and thr oughout the str etch.
Contr action dur ations should be of a moder ate intensi ty.
Contr actions ar e typical ly sustained f or 6 to 10 seconds.
Passive stretch dur ations ar e typical ly 30 seconds.
940
Rest periods of 30 seconds are recommended between repetitions, and 2 to 4
repetitions ar e recommended per str etch.
Ensur e a thor ough w arm-up is perf ormed prior to PNF str etching.
Use moderate contraction intensi ties rather than high intensi ties, especial ly if
stretching smal ler joints.
Progress the ROM gr adual ly during the pr otocols.
Effective communic ation with your partner is essential to ensur e the exercise
is perf ormed saf ely.
Take special car e if stretching smal ler joints such as the shoulders.
  41  CALVES
  42  CHEST
941
  43  GROIN
  44  QUADRICEPS AND HIP FLEXORS
942
  45  SHOULDERS
KEY TERMS
active stretch
agonist contr action
autogenic inhibi tion
ball-and-sock et joint
ballistic str etch
943
central nerv ous system (CNS) pr eparatory ex ercise
contract-relax
dynamic flexibi lity
dynamic str etch
elastici ty
ellipsoidal joint
fibrosis
flexibi lity
gener al warm-up
Golgi tendon or gan (GT O)
hinge joint
hold-r elax
hold-r elax wi th agonist contr action
mobility
mobility drills
muscle spindles
musculotendinous uni t (MTU)
passiv e stretch
plastici ty
postactiv ation perf ormance enhancement (P APE)
potentiation
proprioceptiv e neur omuscular f acilitation (PNF)
raise, activ ate and mobi lize, and potentiate (RAMP)
range of motion (ROM)
reciprocal inhibi tion
specific warm-up
static flexibi lity
static str etch
stretch r eflex
STUDY QUESTIONS
  1.  Which of the following is not a temper ature-related effect of a
warm-up?
  a.  an incr ease in cor e body temper ature
944
  b.  the disruption of tr ansient connectiv e tissue bonds
  c.  incr eased blood flow to working muscles
  d.  enhanced neur al function
  2.  How does the activate and mobilize phase of the RAMP
protocol di ffer from tr aditional static str etching?
  a.  It emphasiz es holding posi tions to lengthen muscles and
improve flexibi lity.
  b.  It focuses on dev eloping mobi lity through dynamic
movements that bui ld mo vement competency .
  c.  It el iminates mo vement pat terns in f avor of isolated joint
stretches.
  d.  It is only used f or recovery sessions and not bef ore
performance.
  3.  Which of the following statements best reflects advice  for CNS
stimulation?
  a.  The impact of CNS stimulation is highly individual and
should be consider ed on a cost -benefi t basis.
  b.  Stimulation wi ll always require the use of r esistance
training ex ercises.
  c.  Stimulation can only be el icited thr ough the appl ication of
high r esistances.
  d.  B eginners ar e likely to benefi t to a gr eater degr ee than
highly tr ained athletes.
  4.  Which of the following is a potential reason for an increase in
ROM ac cording to the sensory theory?
  a.  autogenic inhibi tion
  b.  incr eases in str etch toler ance
  c.  a change in the mechanical pr operties of the
musculotendinous uni t
  d.  a change in muscle ar chitectur e
  5.  Which of the following statements about static stretching is
supported b y curr ent resear ch evidence?
945
  a.  Total str etch time ac cumulated thr oughout the da y may be
as important as individual str etch dur ation.
  b.  The dur ation of a single str etch is mor e important than
how often str etching is perf ormed.
  c.  Str etching f or a maximum of 10 seconds pr oduces
superior r esults than str etching f or 30 seconds.
  d.  Str etching should be done to the point of pain to incr ease
range of motion.
946