# Section 15.2

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 15: Performance Preparation, Mobility, and Flexibility

**Section:** 15.2 -- Mobility Training

**PDF Pages:** 871--890

Preconditioning activity Variables Main activity
Rest bef ore activi ty: 3-12
min
Resisted sprint (see page 684 )Load: 10%-60% body
weight
Distance: 10-25 m (11-27
yd)
Reps: 1-3
Rest bef ore activi ty: 2-5
minSprint
Depth jump (see page 615 ) Load: B ody weight
Height: 30-90 cm (12-35
in.)
Sets: 1-3
Reps: 1-3
Rest bef ore activi ty: 1-5
minCountermo vement jump
Note:  These are examples; the precise pre- and postcondi tioning activity should be
adjusted to suit the needs of the session. Similarly, the precise variabl es should be
adjusted to the needs of the athlete and the activi ty.
TABLE 15.3  Upper Body CNS Preparatory Exercise
Combinations
Preconditioning activity Variables Main activity
Bench pr ess (see page 430 ) Load: 60%-90% 1RM
Sets: 1-3
Reps: 1-3
Rest bef ore activi ty: 3-12 minMedicine bal l throw
Push pr ess (see page 463 ) Load: 40%-80% 1RM
Sets: 1-3
Reps: 1-3
Rest bef ore activi ty: 3-12 minShot put
Note:  These are examples; the precise pre- and postcondi tioning activity should be
adjusted to suit the needs of the session. Similarly, the precise variabl es should be
adjusted to the needs of the athlete and the activi ty.
871
Guidelines a nd Precautions for CNS
Preparatory Exercises
The stimu latory effect is likely greater with well-trained athletes with high
speed and power capaci ties.
Resistance-based protocols likely have the greatest potential for gain but also
the gr eatest potential f or fatigue.
Plyometric and resisted sprint -based exercises may have lower potential but
be mor e accessible f or use in w arm-ups.
Higher intensities will likely gener ate greater potentiation but also greater
fatigue and thus r equire greater r ecovery times.
The closer the similarity between the precondi tioning activity and the main
activity, the higher the l ikely transfer to enhanced perf ormance.
The effects of all protocols will be highly variable and should be prescribed on
an individual basis.
Some athletes ma y not benefi t from CNS stimulation.
The logistical challenges of implementing protocols may outweigh any
potential benefi ts.
Any decision should be based on a wide and compr ehensiv e cost-benefi t
analysis.
872
Flexibility
Flexibi lity is defined as the range of motion (ROM)  that occurs
about a joint. Flexibi lity can be expressed statical ly and dynamical ly.
Static flexibility  refers to the range of possible movement about a
joint (28) and its surrounding muscles during a passiv e movement
(40). Static flexibi lity requires no voluntary muscular activity; an
external force such as gravity, a partner , or a machine provides the
force for a stretch. Dynamic flexibility , on the other hand, refers
to the available ROM during active movements and therefore
requires voluntary muscular  actions. Dynamic ROM is gener ally
greater than static ROM. Howev er, the relationship between static
and dynamic ROM has historical ly been questioned and still remains
largely unresolved, especial ly in relation to the fact that a normal
range of motion cannot guarantee normal movement (19), indicating
that ROM alone cannot determine the quality of any movement.
Therefore, the direct transfer between measur es of static flexibi lity
and sport perf ormance cannot be determined.
In determining the role flexibi lity can play in performance, it is
important to look at the nature of the sport or activity being
undertak en. Given that performance in the majori ty of sports is
dynamic in nature, it is advised to look beyond the role of flexibi lity
as a static quality and instead consider its contribution as a dynamic
quality (66). Here, the concept of mobility introduced earlier can be
a more enlightening term than flexibi lity, naturally reflecting this
dynamic quality. Effective mobility requires the integr ation of aspects
such as balance coordination, postur al control coordination, and
perception (19). In this way, mobility automatical ly frames flexibi lity
as a dynamic quality, with the athlete required to demonstr ate
control, coordination, and force through any demonstr ated ROM,
essential ly being analogou s to dynamic flexibi lity. This is
advantageous when considering the role of flexibi lity on
performance. Indeed, enhanced ROM without appropriate motor
control will not maximiz e perf ormance (80).
873
Flexibility and Performance
Given the lack of a direct link between flexibi lity and movement
capabi lity, optimizing flexibi lity in relation to the specific activity
rather than simply maximiz ing flexibi lity should be the focus of
training (68). Clearly , the direct effects of flexibi lity on performance
therefore depend on the types of activity undertak en, and it is
always importa nt to remember that the most flexible athlete is not
always the most successful (84). Given that different sports and
activities have specific requirements for ROM, it is likely that optimal
levels of flexibi lity exist for each activity, with these related to the
specific movements required within the particular sport or activity,
together with the reduction of any potential injury risk that may
present if an athlete lacks a specific ROM (93). As well as a
consider ation of the ROM itself, it is also important that the strength
and conditioning professional keep in mind the kinetic and kinematic
patterns required within the ROM, because this will also dictate the
types of development methods used. The development of greater
ROM should be linked with the requirements for enhancing
performance, and this often involves the need to apply force over
the required ROM and the ability to assume the key technical
positions required for the sport. In some instances, greater ROM can
be seen as the missing link in the athlete’ s power program, because
the ability to apply force over a greater ROM can increase impulse by
extending the time over which the athlete can apply force, which in
turn contribute s to enhanced performance in a range of sports (61).
Thus, the strength and condi tioning professional should look at the
optimal ROM required of the athlete but also at the underlying goal
of the actions and force patterns required through this ROM, and
where greater ROM is required, this should be in tandem  with the
required force capaci ties to ensur e that the athlete is optimal ly
prepared for perf ormance.
There are clearly optimal ranges of flexibi lity for different sports
and activities, and injury risk may be increased when an athlete is
unable to attain this range. Yet increased ROM is not a panacea, and
874
it is important to note that both inflexibi lity and hyperfle xibility can
increase injury  risk (77, 89). For example, in contact sports, an
excessiv e ROM at the should er or a laxity in the ligaments of the
knee may predispose the athlete to injury in contact situations.
Additional ly, gener al flexibi lity imbalances between joints, which
could incr ease injury risk, must be consider ed (87 , 88).
Factors Affecting Flexibility
A number of anatomical and training-r elated factors affect flexibi lity.
Training canno t alter some factors, such as joint structur e, age, and
sex. Howev er, others can be manipulated and thus are important
consider ations in the design of flexibi lity development programs. A
long-term program of stretching can have cumulativ e positive effects
ranging from enhanced flexibi lity to enhanced strength (80).
Strength and condi tioning professionals should consider each
athlete’ s unique combination of factors and sport requirements when
recommending flexibi lity dev elopment ex ercises and pr ograms.
Joint Structure
The structure of a joint determines its ROM (64). Ball-and-socket
joints , such as the hip and shoulder , move in all anatomical planes
and have the greatest ROM of all joints (64). The wrist is an
ellipsoidal joint (an oval-shaped condyle that fits into an elliptical
cavity), primari ly allowing movement in the sagittal and frontal
planes; its ROM is significant ly less than that of the shoulder or hip
(64). In contrast, the knee is a modified hinge joint, with
movement primarily in the sagittal plane; its ROM is less than that of
either a ball-and-sock et joint or the ellipsoidal wrist joint. The type
of joint, the shapes of the joint’s articulating surfaces, and the soft
tissues surr ounding the joint al l affect its ROM.
Age and Sex
Young people tend to be more flexible than older people (76), and
females tend to be more flexible than males (76). Differences in
875
flexibi lity between young men and women may be due in part to
structur al and anatomical differences and the type and extent of
activities performed. Older people under go a process called fibrosis ,
in which fibrous connectiv e tissue replaces degener ating muscle
fibers (57). This is likely due to inactivi ty and a tendency to use less
of the available ROM during movement. Just as older people can
improve strength, they can improve flexibi lity with appropriate
exercise.
Muscle and Connective Tissue
A range of body tissues can influence flexibi lity. For examp le, factors
such as muscle tissue, the musculotendinous unit (MTU) ,
tendons, ligaments, fascial sheaths, joint capsules, and skin may
limit ROM (28). The relative contributions of these to increased
flexibi lity, both acutely and chronical ly, remain unclear and reflect
the relative impacts of elasticity  and plasticity  (93). Elastici ty
refers to the ability to return to original resting length after a passiv e
stretch, while plastici ty refers to the tendency to assume a new and
greater length after a passiv e stretch. Stretching exercises can
positively affect connectiv e tissues by taking advantage of their
plastic potential, although the relative importance of each tissue type
and the differences between individual responses remains unclear
(12).
Stretch Tolerance
An important factor in determining an athlete’ s flexibi lity is stretch
tolerance, or the ability to tolerate the discomf ort of stretching (84).
Individuals with a greater ROM tend to demonstr ate a greater level
of stretch tolerance and are thus able to tolerate a greater stretch
load (12). One important feature of a regular stretching program is
that it can increase an athlete’s stretch tolerance, thus potential ly
permi tting further incr eases in flexibi lity (7).
876
Neural Control
The control of an athlete’ s ROM is as much determined by central
and peripheral nervous system inputs as by structur al elements (66);
see chapter 1 for more detail. This system includes both afferent and
efferent mech anisms, resulting in both reflexiv e and conscious
activities that ultimately control the ROM an athlete is able to attain
(see the Proprioceptor  sidebars on pages 376 and 378). A key
aspect of an effective flexibi lity program is the capaci ty to positively
affect this system, al lowing f or elicitation of a gr eater ROM.
Resistance Training
A comprehensiv e and proper resistance training program may
increase flexib ility (69) and also assist in the development of force
capaci ty through the enhanced ROM. Effective strength training
protocols should be seen as an important adjunct to a stretching
program (78). Howev er, this comes with two provisos. The first
proviso is that heavy resistan ce training with limited ROM during the
exercises may decrease ROM (28). To prevent loss of ROM, an
athlete should perform exercises that develop both agonist and
antagonist muscles (16) and should exercise through the full
available ROM of the in volved joints.
Muscle Bulk
The second proviso is that a significant increase in muscle  bulk may
adversely affect ROM by impeding joint movement. An athlete with
large biceps and deltoids, for example, may experience difficulty in
stretching the triceps (28), causing difficulty in performing exercises
such as racking a power clean or in performing sport-speci fic skills
such as throwing at high velocities. Although altering the training
program can decrease the amount of muscle bulk, this may not be
advisable for large power athletes such as shot putters or American
footbal l offensive linemen. Strength and condi tioning professionals
should always keep the requirements of the athlete’ s sport in mind:
In some  activities, the need for muscle hypertr ophy may supersede
877
the need for extreme joint mobility, but similarly, where ROM is
crucial, the potential negativ e effects of muscle bulk should be
consider ed and tr aining pr ograms planned ac cordingly .
Activity Level
An active person tends to be more flexible than an inactiv e one,
although it is important to note that it is not activity level alone that
improves flexibility but also the type of activity that influences
flexibi lity (76). Stretching exercises, or exercises requiring the body
to move through a full ROM,  are essential if joint flexibi lity is to be
maintained or increased. Similarly, resistance training, especial ly
using full ranges of motion, can be an effective stimulus to maintain
or increase ROM, and both men and women have successfully
increased their flexibi lity as an outcome of properly designed
resistance tr aining pr ograms (69).
Proprioceptor: Muscle Spindles
The muscle spindles  are located within intrafusal muscle fibers that run parallel
to extrafusal muscle fibers; they monitor changes in muscle length (40). During a
rapid stretching movement, a sensory neuron from the muscle spindle innerv ates a
motor neuron in the spine. The motor  neuron then causes a muscle action of the
previously stretche d extrafusal muscle fibers; this is the stretch reflex .
Stimulation of the muscle spindle and the subsequent activation of the stretch
reflex should be avoided during stretching, because motion will be limited by the
reflexiv e muscle action. If the muscl e spindles are not stimulated, the muscle
relaxes and allows greater stretch. Because of the very slow movement during
static stretching, the stretch reflex is not invoked. Rapid (ballistic and dynamic)
stretching mo vements ma y stimulate the muscle spindles, causing a str etch r eflex.
878
Types of Stretching
Stretching techniques typical ly fall into three broad categories:
static, dynamic, and pr econtr action (73).
Static Stretching
The static stretching approach requires the movement of a body
segment to a point in the ROM where resistance to further
movement is experienced (i.e., the end position). This stretching
action can be performed either actively or passiv ely. An active
stretch  occurs when the person stretching supplies the necessary
forces to enable the end position to be reached. During the sitting
toe touch, for example, the athlete contracts the abdominal muscles
and hip flexors to flex the torso forward to stretch the hamstrings
and low back. A passive stret ch occurs when a partner or a
stretching machine provides external force to cause or enhance a
stretch.
A static stretch  involves a slow and constant movement toward
the end position, which is then held for 10 to 30 seconds (66). This
duration is thought to cause an acute viscoelastic relaxation
response, facilitating relaxation and concurr ent elongation of the
stretched muscle (34). Because it is performed slowly , static
stretching does not elicit the stretch reflex of the stretched muscle
(71); therefore, the likelihood of injury is less than during ballistic
stretching (71). In addition, static stretching is easy to learn and has
been shown to effectively improve ROM (38). Although injury to
muscles or connectiv e tissue  may result if the static stretch is too
intense, there are no real disadvantages to static stretching as long
as proper technique is used.  Static stretching is appropriate for all
athletes in a v ariety of sports f or incr easing flexibi lity.
The sitting toe touch is a good example of a static stretch. To
perform this stretch statical ly, the athlete sits on the ground with the
lower extremities together and knees extended, leans forward from
the waist, and slowly reaches toward the ankles. The athlete
879
gradual ly increases the intensi ty of the stretch by leanin g forward
until he or she feels mild discomf ort in the hamstrings or lower back.
The athlete holds this position for 10 to 30 seconds and then slowly
returns to an upright sitting position. The stretch is static because it
is perf ormed slowly and the end posi tion is held wi thout mo vement.
Dynamic Stretching
Dynamic stretching  is a broad term used to describe actions that
involve active motions where a performer moves actively in a
controlled and moder ate paced manner through a typical ly large
ROM (66). Often this approach is used as a type of functional ly
based stretching exercise that uses sport-generic and sport-speci fic
movements to prepare the body for activity (48). Dynamic stretching
—sometimes referred to as mobility drills  (3)—places an emphasis
on the movement requirements of the sport or activity rather than
on individual muscles. This type of exercise can closely duplicate the
movement requirements of a sport or activity (48); for example, a
walking knee l ift stretch mimics the knee l ift of a sprinter .
The ability to actively move a joint through a ROM is generally far
more sport specific than the ability to statical ly hold a stretch.
Advantages of dynamic stretching include the ability to promote
mobility and to replicate the movement patterns and ROM required
for sport activities. As a conse quence, dynamic stretches, as outlined
in the discussion of warm-up , are increasingly the preferred method
of incr easing the ROM during w arm-up .
In dynamic stretching, unlike static stretching, the muscle does
not relax during the stretch but instead is active through the ROM;
this is also more specific to the movement patterns that occur in
sport. Even though it is an ideal warm-up activity, dynamic
stretching may be less effective than static or proprioceptiv e
neuromuscular facilitation stretching at increasing static ROM (71);
in situations in which an increased static ROM is needed , static or
proprioceptiv e neur omuscular f acilitation methods ma y be pr eferred.
880
When one is designing a dynamic stretching program, the starting
point should be a careful analysis of the major movement patterns
within the given sport as well as an analysis of fundamental
movement patterns that can facilitate performance and the ROM
required within these movements. One can then select exercises that
replicate those movements via a series of dynamic stretches. In this
way, it is possible to achiev e a highly speci fic flexibi lity program.
Dynamic stretching also provides the opportuni ty to combine
movements (48). This gives the strength and conditioning
professional a large number  of combinations that can be used to
provide variety in the warm-up . Athletes can perform dynamic
stretching exercises either for a series of repetitions in the same
place (e.g., 10 lunges) or for a series of repetitions to cover a given
distance (e.g., lunge for 15 m [16 yd]). Regardless of the method
chosen, each drill should start at an appropriate ROM and gradual ly
increase this during subsequent repetitions or sets. Additional ly, the
speed of movement can also be increased but always under a high
level of control. For example, athletes can perform the knee lift
exercise over a distance of 15 meters, starting at a walk and building
to a skip in subsequent r epetitions.
In a dynamic stretch that mirrors a sport skill—such as a sprinter ’s
knee lift drill—it is important that the stretch also emphas ize the key
skill factors required for the movement so that the most important
mechanics of the drill are reinforced. For example, if the knee lift
drill is used in the warm-up , effective body mechanics should be
emphasiz ed along with key joint positions such as dorsiflexion of the
ankle of the lifted foot. The use of dynamic stretches must always be
coordinated with appropriate sport techniques and never
compr omise pr oper technique.
A ballistic stret ch can be consid ered a special type of dynamic
stretch. Ballistic stretches similarly involve active muscular efforts,
but rather than performing these under control, they instead use
intense bounc ing-type movements to achiev e the required ROM
(66). Ballistic stretching, if not appropriately controlled or
881
sequenced, may injure muscles or connectiv e tissues, especial ly
when there has been a previous injury (20). Ballistic stretching
usually triggers the stretch reflex that does not allow the involved
muscles to relax, which may limit ROM, so the strength and
condi tioning pr ofessional should moni tor this during the session.
For example, consider the sitting toe touch performed as a
ballistic stretch rather than a static stretch. The athlete sits on the
ground with knees extended, lower extremities together , and upper
body perpendicular to the legs. The athlete reaches quickly toward
the ankles, bounces at the end position, and immediately returns to
a near-vertical upper body position. With each repetition, the end
position extends farther than in the preceding repetition. Ballistic
stretching has been shown to be as effective as static stretching in
enhancing ROM (58) and could play a role in a flexibi lity
development program (22). However, care must be taken to ensur e
that the athlete is appropriately prepared for this type of exercise
acutely and chronical ly, and special care should be taken when a
previous injury has been r eported.
Dynamic and ballistic stretches may appear similar; howev er, a
number of key differences significantly alter the effects of these
activities such that dynamic stretching avoids the potential negativ e
effects associa ted with ballistic stretching. Dynamic stretching avoids
bouncing and is performed in a more controlled manner than ballistic
stretching. The result is a controlled ROM that is often smaller than
that produced by ballistic stretching but demonstr ates the control
required to be able to actively move through the full ROM and
assume and hold the end posi tion.
Precontraction Stretching
Proprioceptive neuromus cular facilitation (PNF)  is the most
common precontr action stretching methodology . PNF was original ly
developed in the late 1940s as part of a neuromuscular rehabilitation
program designed to relax muscles with increased tone or activity
(1, 81). It has since been expanded to athletics as a method of
882
increasing flexibi lity. PNF techniques are usually performed with a
partner and involve both passiv e movement and active (concentric
and isometric) muscle actions . PNF stretching has been purported as
being superior to other stretching methods for increasing flexibi lity
(81), possibly because it activates the sensory recept ors in the
agonist and antagonist muscles (56), although evidence for this has
not been consistently shown (38, 56). Additional ly, PNF stretching
can often be impractical because most of the stretches require a
partner and some expertise.
During a PNF stretch, three specific muscle actions are used to
facilitate the passiv e stretch. Both isometric and concentric muscle
actions of the antagonist (i.e., the muscle being stretched) are used
before a passiv e stretch of the antagonist to achiev e autogenic
inhibi tion (see the Proprioceptor: Golgi Tendon Organs sidebar on
this page). The isometric muscle action is referred to as hold and the
concentric muscle action as contract. A concentric muscle action  of
the agonist, called agonist contraction , is used during a passiv e
stretch of the antagonist to achiev e reciprocal inhibi tion. Each
technique also involves passiv e, static stretches that are referred to
as relax. When using static contractions, these should be held for
approximately 3 to 6 seconds at no more than 20% of maximum
voluntary contraction, with the first repetition gener ally giving the
greatest benefi t. One or two sessions per week are recommended
(81).
Proprioceptor: Golgi Tendon Organs
The Golgi tendon organs  (GTOs) are sensitive to increases in muscular tension.
When stimulated, the GTO causes a muscle to reflexiv ely relax. Relaxation  that
occurs in the same muscle that is experiencing increased tension is called
autogenic inhibit ion (18, 22). Autogenic inhibi tion is accomplished via active
contraction of a muscle immediately before a passiv e stretch of that same muscle.
Tension built up during the active contraction stimulates the GTO, causing a
reflexiv e relaxation  of the muscle during the subsequent passiv e stretch.
Relaxation that occurs in the muscle opposing the muscle experiencing the
increased tension is called reciprocal inhibit ion (18). This occurs when one
883
simultaneously contracts the muscle opposing the muscle that is being passiv ely
stretched. Here the tension in the contracting muscle stimulates the GTO and
causes a simul taneous r eflexiv e relaxation of the str etched muscle.
There are three basic PNF stretching techniques: hold-r elax (15,
18), contract-relax (15), and hold-r elax with agonist contraction
(18). The techniques are completed in three phases. With each of
the three techniques, the first phase incorpor ates a passiv e
prestretch of 10 seconds. The muscle actions used in the second and
third phases differ for the three techniques; the second  and third
phases giv e each technique i ts name.
The following sections use the hamstring stretch to describe the
three techniques; figures 15.1 and 15.2 show the starting positions
for the athlete and the partner .
FIGURE 15.1  Starting posi tion of PNF hamstring str etch.
884
FIGURE 15.2   Partner and athlete leg and hand posi tions f or PNF hamstring str etch.
Hold-Relax
The hold-relax  technique begins with a passiv e prestretch that is
held at the point of mild discomfort for 10 seconds (figure 15.3). The
partner then applies a hip flexion force and instructs the athlete,
“Hold and do not let me move the leg.” The athlete holds and resists
the movement so that an isometric muscle action occurs and is held
for 6 seconds (figure 15.4). The athlete then relaxes, and a passiv e
stretch is performed and held for 30 seconds (figure 15.5). The final
stretch should be of greater magni tude due to autogenic inhibi tion
(i.e., activ ation of the hamstrings).
885
FIGURE 15.3  Passive prestretch of hamstrings during hold-r elax PNF hamstring str etch.
FIGURE 15.4  Isometric action during hold-r elax PNF hamstring str etch.
886
FIGURE 15.5  Increased ROM during passiv e stretch of hold-r elax PNF hamstring str etch.
Contract-Relax
The contract-relax  technique also begins with a passiv e prestretch
of the hamstrin gs that is held at the point of mild discomf ort for 10
seconds (figure 15.6). The athlete then extends  the hip against
resistance from the partner so that a concentric muscle action
through the full ROM occurs (figure 15.7). The athlete then relaxes,
and a passiv e hip flexion stretch is applied and held for 30 seconds
(figure 15.8) while the athlete concentrical ly contracts the agonist.
The increased ROM is facilitated due to autogenic inhibi tion (i.e.,
activation of the hamstrings).  In an alternativ e to this technique, the
athlete attempts to extend the hip and the partner does not allow
the movement (63). Because this is essential ly the same as the hold-
relax technique, the contract-relax method described  here is
preferred.
Hold-Relax With Agonist Contraction
The hold-relax with agonist contraction  technique is identical to
hold-r elax in the first two phases (figures 15.9 and 15.10 ). During
the third phase, a partner applies force to the antagonist muscle
groups while the athlete is required to maintain the position through
a conce ntric action of the agonist, thus adding to the stretch force
(figure 15.11). Following the isometric hold, the athlete flexes the
887
hip, thereby moving further into the new ROM. With this technique,
the final stretch should be greater, primari ly because of reciprocal
inhibi tion (i.e., activation of the hip flexors) (63) and secondari ly
because of autogenic inhibi tion (i.e., activation of the hamstrings)
(63).
The hold-relax with agonist contraction is the most
effective PNF stretching technique due to facilitation via
both reciprocal and autogenic inhibition.
See pages 407 through 409 for descriptions and photos  of PNF
stretching exercises using a partner for the calves, chest, groin,
quadriceps and hip flex ors, and shoulders.
FIGURE 15.6  Passive prestretch of hamstrings during contr act-relax PNF str etch.
888
FIGURE 15.7  Concentric action of hip extensors during contr act-relax PNF str etch.
FIGURE 15.8  Increased ROM during passiv e stretch of contr act-relax PNF str etch.
889
FIGURE 15.9 Passive prestretch during hold-r elax with agonist contraction PNF
hamstring str etch.
FIGURE 15.10  Isometric action of hamstrings during hold-r elax with agonist contraction
PNF hamstring str etch.
890