# Section 17.2

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 17: Alternative Modes and Nontraditional Implement Training

**Section:** 17.2 -- Core Stability and Balance Training

**PDF Pages:** 1106--1125

Ways to apply chains include letting them touch the floor from the
fully extended position during the movement (17) or hanging them
from lighter chains (figure 17.1), which  allows them to touch the
floor only on reaching the lowest portion (figure 17.2) of the
movement pattern (i.e., bottom of the squat or at chest level during
the bench press) (8, 10). Baker (8) suggests that the second method
may affect the velocity of movement in three distinct ways. First, the
total barbel l–chain complex comes into play only at the top of the
movement (i.e., extend portion) when the chain links have been
lifted off the floor. At the bottom of the movement, the links are in
full contact with the floor, providing a reduction in load and allowing
the athlete to accelerate the barbel l at a faster rate. Second, it is
possible that a within-r epetition postactiv ation potentiation effect
may occur in response to a greater neural activation. Specifically,
when the chains pile on the floor and the mass of the barbel l
decreases, a greater neuromuscular activation may occur, allowing
for an enhancement in movement velocity. Finally, it is possible that
the decreasing resistance at the bottom portion of the movement
may cause a more rapid stretch–shortening cycle. Baker (8)
suggests that this happens in response to the eccentric unloading
that occurs when the chain links pile on the floor at the bottom of
the movement and a quicker amortization phase occurs when the
athlete shi fts from ec centric to concentric muscle action.
1106
FIGURE 17.1 Bench press with added chain resistance. The links of the chains are
draped over the lighter supporting chains, such that the chain does not contact the floor
until the barbel l reaches chest height. As the athlete lowers the barbel l to the chest, the
resistance progressively decreases as the chains furl onto the floor. Conversely , as the
athlete moves the barbel l concentrical ly away from the chest, the resistance progressively
increases as the chains unf url from the floor .
FIGURE 17.2 When the barbel l is at chest height during the bench press, the chains are
furled on the floor , with the r esult that their weight does not act on the barbel l.
Resistance Band Exercises
The use of resistance bands  to augment traditional barbel l
resistances has become increasingly popular among strength and
condi tioning professionals (8, 39, 77, 138, 145). There is some
resear ch support for the use of resistance bands combined with
1107
traditional resistance training exercises (5, 104, 127, 146). For
example, Wallace and colleagues (146) suggest that using bands to
substi tute 35% of the total load during a back squat can acutely
increase peak power by approximately 13%. Additional ly, Baker and
Newton (9) suggest that the use of bands may result in a
postactiv ation potentiation effect within each repetition. Support for
this contention comes from the work of Stevenson and colleagues
(127), who demonstr ated that the use of bands to account for 20%
of the training load resulted in an acute increase in the concentric
rate of force development when compar ed to a constant -loaded
condi tion. While these data seem to suggest that the addition of
bands to traditional resistance training methods may offer some
benefi t, especi ally to power or rate of force development (66), some
resear ch conte sts these findings (35, 115). For example, Ebben and
Jensen (35) report no differences in integr ated electr omyography
and mean ground reaction forces when resistance bands are used to
apply 10% of the total loading during squats.
Currently, minimal resear ch on the use of resistance bands,
especial ly longitudinal studies, has been conducted to determine
whether the acute effects noted by some authors translate into
superior strength and power gains over time. Howev er, there is
some evidence that the use of resistance bands during an off-season
strength training program performed by Division 1AA footbal l players
induces a greater increase in upper body strength when compar ed
to performing traditional bench press training (44). While these data
are promising and provide some support for using bands as part of a
performance-based resistan ce training program, much more
resear ch is needed to understand how these methods can be
integr ated into a periodiz ed training pr ogram.
Determining Resistance With Resistance Bands
In working with resistance bands, it is important to understand that
their composi tion varies depending on the type of therm oplastic or
elastomer used to produce them (88). The composi tion of resistance
1108
bands is important because it can exert an impact on their overall
stiffness, density, yield, and tensile strength (82, 88, 89, 138).
Ultimately , the tension (resistance) gener ated by a resistance band is
determined by the overall stiffness of the band and the extent to
which the band is stretched (deformation) (89, 165). Specifically,
based on Hooke’s law, the tension gener ated by a band is equal to
its stiffness ( k) multiplied by the def ormation ( d):
Tension = Stiffness  (k) × Deformation  (d)
As the band is stretched (i.e., increased deformation), the amount
of tension placed on the band linearly increases. Howev er, several
studies suggest that resistance bands exhibi t both curvilinear and
linear def ormation r egions (5, 89, 105).
When using bands in conjunction with traditional free weight
training exercises such as the bench press or back squat, the
strength and condi tioning professional must be aware that there can
be a 3.2% to 5.2% difference between two supposedly equal bands
that could result in an 8% to 19% difference in mean tension
between the bands (89). A basic length–tension relations hip can be
seen in table 17.2, and tension can be predicted based on the length
of the band wi th the use of a pr ediction equation.
TABLE 17.2  Examples of Resistance Band Length–
Tension Relationships
Width
(mm) ColorLength–tension relationships
Tension
prediction
equation110 CM
(43.3
IN.)120 CM
(47.2
IN.)130 CM
(51.2
IN.)140 CM
(55.1
IN.)150 CM
(59.1
IN.)
14 Yellow 2.6 kg
(5.7 lb)5.7 kg
(12.6 lb)8.1 kg
(17.9 lb)9.8 kg
(21.6 lb)11.5 kg
(25.4 lb)Y = −0.003x2 +
0.98x − 69.82
22 Red 4.6 kg
(10.1 lb)9.6 kg
(21.2 lb)13.3 kg
(29.3 lb)16.6 kg
(36.6 lb)19.2 kg
(42.3 lb)Y = −0.004x2 +
1.38x − 99.49
Adapted by permiss ion from D.T. McMa ster, J. Cronin, and M. McGuigan, “Quanti fication of
Rubber and Chain-B ased Resistance Modes, ” Journal of Strength and Condi tioning
Resear ch 24, no. 8 (2010): 2061.
1109
32 Blue 8.5 kg
(18.7 lb)14.8 kg
(32.6 lb)19.5 kg
(43.0 lb)23.9 kg
(52.7 lb)27.3 kg
(60.2 lb)Y = −0.004x2 +
1.60x − 114 .86
48 Green 11.8 kg
(26.0 lb)16.5 kg
(36.4 lb)24.0 kg
(52.9 lb)30.0 kg
(66.1 lb)49.3 kg
(108.7
lb)Y = −0.007x2 +
2.43x − 179.56
67 Black 15.4 kg
(34.0 lb)29.1 kg
(64.2 lb)40.0 kg
(88.2 lb)49.3 kg
(108.7
lb)57.2 kg
(126 lb)Y = −0.010x2 +
3.73x − 269.21
Adapted by permiss ion from D.T. McMa ster, J. Cronin, and M. McGuigan, “Quanti fication of
Rubber and Chain-B ased Resistance Modes, ” Journal of Strength and Condi tioning
Resear ch 24, no. 8 (2010): 2061.
Similar to how resistance is applied with the use of chains, the
use of bands requires the strength and condi tioning professional to
determine how much load is provided by the free weigh t and how
much is provided from the bands throughout the range of movement
(8). Specifically, the strength and condi tioning professional must
determine the load of the band at the bottom and top portions of
the movement  and create an average of these two loads. Based on
the recommen dations of Baker (8), an athlete who wants to train at
a 5RM load of 150 kilograms (331 lb) with bands would subtract the
average of the two band positions (i.e., top and bottom) and reduce
the load on the bar by that amount. So if the band exerts a zero
resistance load at the bottom of the movement and a load of 26.6
kilograms (58.6 lb) at the top position (i.e., lockout in the bench
press), based on the length of the band achiev ed as it is stretched,
the athlete would subtract 13.3 kilograms (29.3 lb) from the total
weight on the bar without the bands to get 136 to 137 kilograms
(300-302 lb).
Applying Resistance Bands to Free Weight Exercises
To apply resistance bands to free weight resistance exercises, one
can use a multitude of methods. The band may be attached to the
barbel l and either a customiz ed attachment point on a squat rack or
heavily weight ed dumbbel ls (8). When the bands are applied, the
1110
highest tension  and the total resistance load are provided to the
athlete at the top position. Conversely , at the bottom position the
applied load is reduced, because the bands will no longer be
stretched and thus no longe r apply resistance to the barbell. For
example, in the squat at the lowest point (i.e., bottom position,
figure 17.3), the bands are slack and do not actively create tension
on the barbel l, thus adding no additional resistance to the exercise.
As the athlete ascends from the bottom position and approaches the
lockout position, the bands will impart a larger stretch resistance,
and the athlete will experience the full load of both the bar and the
bands (figure 17.4). It is important to note that as the athlete
ascends from the bottom position the stretch load gradual ly
increases. Conversely , as the athlete descends, the stretch load
gradual ly decr eases.
FIGURE 17.3  Bottom posi tion of a squat perf ormed wi th bands.
1111
FIGURE 17.4  Top posi tion of a squat perf ormed wi th bands.
Application of an Accentuated Eccentric
Load
The prescription of training loads during resistance training typical ly
emplo ys the use of a constant load that is lifted during the eccentric
and concentric portions of the resistance training exercise. This
practice creates a unique loading problem because it is well
documented that muscles are stronger during eccentric (i.e.,
lengthening) versus concen tric (i.e., shortening) muscle actions,
resulting in what is referred to as an eccentric strength deficit (figure
17.5) (51, 91). In fact, depending on the exercise, up to 50% more
force can be produced during eccentric muscle actions when
compar ed to concentric muscle actions (34, 53, 64, 70, 143). As
1112
such, the use of constant loads during resistance training results in a
lower relative load being used during the eccentric phase of the
movement when compar ed to the concentric phase (144). As a
result of this submaximal loading, motor unit recruitment and firing
rates during the eccentric phase of the movement may be reduced
(125), sarcoplasmic calcium release may decrease, and stimulus for
myocellular adaptations may be reduced (42). To address these
issues, alternativ e training methods applying load during resistance
training are often sought so that loads are applied in a phase-
specific manner when targeting hypertr ophic adaptations and
increases in maximal str ength (144).
FIGURE 17.5 Example strength  deficit between the eccentric and concentric 1-repetition
maximum (1RM) in the bench pr ess.
Data from Kelly et al. (2015).
One variable resistance training strategy that addresses this
differential is the use of accentuated eccentric loading (AEL) ,
which is sometimes referred to as augmented eccentric loading
(95, 132). With this loading  strategy , an additional load is applied
during the eccentric phase of the movement and then removed
during the concentric phase of the movement. For example, an
eccentric muscle action can be overloaded during a
countermo vement jump by holding dumbbel ls and releasing them
1113
before the initiation of the vertical jump (122). Alternativ ely, if the
athlete’ s 1RM bench press is 120 kilograms (265 lb), the eccentric
phase of the movement could be performed with 100% of the
concentric 1RM (i.e., 120 kg [265 lb]) and the load can be reduced
to 60% of 1RM (i.e., 72 kg [159 lb]) during the concentr ic phase of
the exercise (32). Typical ly, this is accompl ished with the use of
weight releasin g devices, often referred to as a weight release r (91,
95).
Benefits Associated With Accentuated Eccentric
Loading
The primary benefi ts associated with the use of AEL occur as a result
of an overload  applied during the eccentric phase of a resistance
training or jumping exercise (91). Relatively little resear ch has
explor ed the chronic application of AEL, but due to the greater
mechanical tension (43) and work (142, 143) during the eccentric
phase, some resear chers have suggested that AEL would be useful
when targeting hypertr ophy. While this rationale is sound , based on
the available resear ch increases in muscle size associated with AEL
are compar able to traditional training methods (78, 119). It is,
howev er, plausible that AEL results in architectur al change s, such as
the elongation of the muscle fascicles, allowing for higher shortening
velocities which could affect strength and power performance (91).
Additional ly, the application of AEL tactics may have further benefi ts
to enhancing strength and power performance by inducing changes
to the neuromuscular system (144). This hypothesis is partial ly
supported by the work of Walker and colleagues (144),  who have
reported improved voluntar y muscle activation and significantly
greater improvements in maximal strength after 10 weeks of training
with AEL when compar ed to traditional resistance  training.
Ultimately , while there is an emerging body of evidence that using
AEL tactics stimulates greater improvements in maximal strength
(52, 144) and jump performance (141), more resear ch is needed to
determine the most ef fective AEL pr ogramming str ategies.
1114
Programming and Accentuated Eccentric Loading
When implementing AEL as part of a periodiz ed resistance training
program it is important that the strength and condi tioning
professional remember that AEL is an advanced training tactic that is
used to exploi t the establ ished benefi ts of eccentric overload training
(131). As such, this training tactic should be used with caution, and
it is important that the athlete’s resistance training experience and
strength levels are consider ed when determining the exercises that
AEL is implem ented with and the loads used during both the
eccentric and concentric phases of the mo vement (91).
Accentuated eccentric loading (AEL) is an adva nced
training tactic and should be reserved for athletes with
extensive resistance training experience.
When programming AEL exercises the magni tude of the eccentric
load is gener ally consider ed as either being submaximal (i.e.,
<100% of concentric 1RM), maximal (i.e., 100% of concentric 1RM),
or supramaximal (i.e., >100% of concentric 1RM) (91, 143). The
decision about which eccentri c load to apply is likely mitigated by the
targeted performance outcome and by the athlete’ s training
experience and their relative strength levels, with stronger athletes
likely experiencing greater benefi ts from training with AEL tactics
(91).
One approach for implement ing submaximal AEL is to apply this
loading tactic with kettlebel ls, dumbbel ls, or elastic bands while
performing plyometric exercises (e.g., countermo vement, box, drop,
and depth jumps) (figure 17.6) (1, 91). For example, when a 20-
kilogram (44 lb; ~20% of body mass) load is applied with dumbbel ls
that are held during the eccentric phase and released prior to the
concentric phase of a countermo vement jump, jump performance is
acutely enhanced (122). Similarly, when an eccentric load that is
20% to 30% of body mass is applied during the eccentric phase of a
drop jump and released before the concentric phase of the jump,
1115
performance is improved (1). Ultimately , based on the available
evidence, loads of 20% to 30% of body mass should be
implemented during AEL when attempting to potentiate performance
during the concentric phase of a ply ometric jumping activi ty (91).
FIGURE 17.6 Accentuated eccentric loading prescription recommendations for plyometric
exercises.
Adapted by permission from J.J. Merrigan, J. Borth, C.B. Taber, et al., “Application of Accentuated Eccentric Loading to
Elicit Acute and Chronic Velocity and Power Improvements: A Narrative Review,” International Journal of Strength and
Conditioning 2, no 1. (2022): 12. Distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International
License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
The application of maximal and supramaximal AEL are best suited
for multijoint resistance training exercises, such as the bench press,
back squat, and front squat with the use of either weight releasers
or computer -driven devices (figure 17.7) (92, 98, 136). For example,
Taber and colleagues (136) report significant improvements in
concentric velocity with loads between 30% and 80% of the 1RM
during the bench press when  a maximal AEL (100% of the 1RM) is
implemented. Conversely , when supramaximal AEL is applied with
loads between  105% and 120% of the concentric 1RM, slower
concentric movement velocities occur during the repetition when the
concentric phase is performed with loads between 30% and 80% of
the 1RM (25, 78, 91-93, 142). Howev er, it is plausible that the
differential between the AEL and the load lifted during the concentric
phase of the movement mitigates the acute performance  gains. For
example, if a differential >40% between the AEL and the concentric
load is programmed, significant acute increases in velocity and
power occur during the concentric phase of the repetition (92).
1116
Additional ly, when this type of loading is applied longitudinal ly,
significantly gr eater incr eases in maximal str ength oc cur (144).
FIGURE 17.7 Accentuated eccentric loading (AEL) prescription recommendations for
resistance tr aining ex ercises.
Adapted by permission from J.J. Merrigan, J. Borth, C.B. Taber, et al., “Application of Accentuated Eccentric Loading to
Elicit Acute and Chronic Velocity and Power Improvements: A Narrative Review,” International Journal of Strength and
Conditioning 2, no 1. (2022): 12. Distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International
License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
When programming AEL, three basic strategies can be
implemented: using AEL on every repetition contained within the
set, only apply ing AEL on the first repetition of the set, or using AEL
on the first repetition of a cluster set (figure 17.8) (51). When AEL is
applied on every repetition of a set the set must be structu red with a
cluster set format (i.e., 15-40 s interr epetition rest) so that the
weight releaser can be reappl ied after every repetition (figure
17.8a). The rest interval applied should be structur ed to account for
the time needed to reapply the weight releaser and to re-rack and
un-rack the bar. Alternativ ely, the AEL can be applied on the first
repetition of the set, which allows the repetitions contained in the
set to be performed in a continuous manner with enhanced
1117
movement velocity occurring during the later repetitions contained
within the set (figure 17.8b) (51). For example, Merrigan and
colleagues (92) report that when supramaximal loads are applied on
only the first repetition of a set of 5 the velocity of movement during
repetitions 3 and 5 is significantly enhanced. Based on these data, a
hybrid strategy could be emplo yed where a series of cluste r sets of 3
repetitions could be performed with the AEL applied on the first
repetition and 25 to 35 seconds of intraset rest applied between
clusters (figure 17.8c). With loading pattern, a greater density of AEL
can be applied while still getting acute performance enhancement
during the thir d repetition of each cluster (51, 92, 101).
1118
Nontraditional Implement Training
Methods
Traditional ly, resistance training interv entions used in most modern
strength and condi tioning facilities have relied heavily on barbel ls,
dumbbel ls, and various resistance training machines. More recently ,
strength and condi tioning professionals have begun to incorpor ate
nontraditional implements to potential ly improve training specificity
and to add greater variation to the preparation of athletes.
Nontr aditional implements can include items that are typical ly
associated with strongman training  such as tires, logs, kettlebel ls,
stones, weighted sleds, and other weighted implements (59).
Strongman Training
Strongman implement training has recently seen an increase in
populari ty as a proposed tool for enhancing sport performance (15,
87, 116, 147, 159, 166). Some of the most common strongman
exercises are tire flipping, log (or keg) lifting, farmer ’s walks, and
sled pushes and pulls. While resear ch on these types of exercises is
limited, some evidence sugge sts that they can be used to introduce
a high-intensi ty stimulus resulting in an elevated blood lactate
response (16, 73, 166). Additional ly, it has been suggested that
these types of exercises create a greater degree of instabi lity that
effectively challenges the athlete in different ways compar ed to
traditional resistance training activities (87). Recent systematic
reviews on the biomechanics of strongman have critiqued the
resear ch methodologies emplo yed (63) as well as the results and
potential applications of this type of training within strength and
condi tioning (62).
1119
FIGURE 17.8  Example of ac centuated ec centric loading (AEL) set structur es.
Adapted by permission from M. Harden, P. Comfort, and G.G. Haff, “Eccentric Training: Scientific Background and
Practical Applications,” in Advanced Strength and Conditioning: An Evidence-Based Approach, 2nd ed., edited by A.N.
Turner and P. Comfort (Routledge, 2022), permission conveyed through Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.
Resear ch documenting the chronic training-r elated adaptations
from strongma n-type training are particularly scarce (3, 60, 96, 157,
162). Winwood and colleagues (157) compar ed seven weeks of
strongman compar ed to traditional resistance training on body
composi tion, strength, power , and speed measur es in 30 resistance-
1120
trained, sub-el ite rugby players. While both groups tended to report
improvements in strength and functional performance measur es
(0.2%-7%), no significant differences were observ ed between
groups. This would indicate that strongman training can be equal ly
as effective as traditional training and that its use might provide
additional variety and interest to highly experienced resistance-
trained athlete s who may benefi t from more variations in their
training stimulus.
Heavy sled pulls have also been the focus of some training studies
(96, 157). For example, the training study by Winwood and
colleagues (157) attempted to match strongman to traditional
resistance training exercises. One example was the use of heavy sled
pulls with 85% of the athlete’ s 1RM back squat for 3 sets of 25
meters (27 yd). Morin and colleagues (96) have also compar ed eight
weeks of heavy sled sprint training (10 × 20 m [22 yd] sprints per
session with 80% of body mass) to a control group performing
unresisted sprinting on sprinting performance. Heavy sled training
produced a range of moder ate effect size improvements in horizontal
force productio n and 5-meter (5 yd) sprint performance, with effect
sizes indicating that heavy sled training had small to moder ate
benefi ts when compar ed to traditional sprinting. Further , a meta-
analysis including 13 studies demonstr ated the effectiveness of
resisted sled training with a range of loads (5%-80% body mass) for
improving acceleration (up to 10 m [11 yd]) but not maximum-
velocity sprint performance (3), with no clear indication of what
consti tutes the most ef fective loads.
The effect of tire flipping has also been examined in one study
(162), whereby 29 physical ly active males performed 4 sets of 6
repetitions with either lighter (43 kg [95 lb]) or heavier (104 kg [229
lb]) tires for two sessions per week for 8 weeks. Both groups
significantly improved 6RM bench press, intermi ttent endurance, five
horizontal jumps and change -of-direction ability, with no significant
between-gr oup differences in these responses. Neither group
1121
reported significant improvements in 20-meter (22 yd) sprint times
or repeated sprint abi lity.
Due to the potential ly more awkward and unpredictable nature of
strongman training compar ed to traditional resistance training,
muscle activation and injury risk may also differ substantial ly
between these  training approaches. McGill and colleagues (87)
quanti fied trunk and hip muscle activity and kinetics across the
farmer ’s walk, suitcase carry (unilateral farmer ’s walk), yoke walk,
tire flip, log lift, keg lift, and stone lift. While all of these movements
required exceedingly high levels of activation of certain trunk and hip
muscles and produced large spinal loads, these biomechanical
characteristics exhibi ted consider able between-ex ercise variation.
Such results suggest that each of these strongman exercises impose
somewhat unique challenges on the trunk and hip musculatur e,
suggesting that the inclusion of a variety of strongman  exercises
may be useful to better develop spinal stability across a range of
movement si tuations.
Regarding injury risk, the somewhat unique challenges imposed
by different strongman exercises (87) may be consistent with the
views of 213 strongman athletes who felt that certain exercises (tire
flip, yoke walk, and stone lift) were more danger ous and likely to
contribute to injury risk when compar ed to other strongman
exercises (158) . Perhaps as a consequence of the common usage of
the tire flip, yoke walk, and stone lift by strongman athletes, two
systematic reviews have reported greater injury rates in strongman
athletes when compar ed to other strength sport athlete s such as
weightl ifters, powerl ifters, and bodybui lders (74, 121). Consequently ,
athletes who perform strongman exercises should focus on
performing these exercises with appropriate technique and only use
loads that allow them to maintain adequate body and implement
control.
1122
Tire Flipping
Tire flipping typical ly emplo ys truck or heavy-equipment tires that
can be modified via placem ent of an extra load in the center to
address individual strength needs (59, 147). The select ion of the
appropriate tire size depends on numer ous factors that the strength
and condi tioning professional must consider when designing a
specific program for an athlete. Thought must be given to the tire’s
dimensions, including the height, width, and weight (21). A key
consider ation is the tread on the tire; worn treads are more difficult
to grip, and pronounced treads potential ly contain cuts, debris, or
exposed metal that could put the athlete at risk f or injury (21, 147).
The most common injury associated with the tire flip is biceps
tears (158), which may occur when the hands slip on the tire. To
mitigate this injury risk, it is gener ally recommended that the tires
used should be dry and have sufficient tread to allow the athlete to
maintain grip and properly execute the exercise (21). Additional ly, it
is important that the tire is selected based on the individu al athlete’ s
strength levels and that the movement is performed with
appropriate ex ercise technique so that injury risk is minimiz ed.
Three basic techniques have been used to describe tire flip
techniques: the sumo , the backlift style, and shoulders- against -the-
tire technique (21, 147). The sumo and backlift styles are somewhat
similar in that the feet are placed close to the tire, but they differ on
the width of the feet, somewhat similar to the sumo and
conventional deadlift startin g positions, respectiv ely (147). With
these two techniques, once the tire has been raised to hip or chest
height, the hands are rotated  so that a forward pressing action can
be performed with the arms to flip the tire (147). The shoulders-
against -the-tir e technique has a similar starting position to a rugby
scrum or prowler push, with the athlete’ s face almost touching the
tire, trunk horizontal, and the feet positioned behind the body so
that the shins are horizontal, with the knees positioned slightly in
front of the hips and flex ed to appr oximately 90 degr ees (21).
1123
Limited resear ch has investigated tire flipping techniqu es (73,
162). Keogh and colleagues (73) primari ly quanti fied the phases and
tempor al characteristics most related to successful (fast) completion
of 2 sets of 6 repetitions of a 232-ki logram (511 lb) tire flip,
separ ated by 3 minutes’ rest. The phases of the movement were
broken down into a first pull, second pull, transition, and push,
somewhat similar to the clean and jerk. Results suggested that
minimizing time during the second pull and push phases was most
associated with faster flips, suggesting that the tire flip may be used
as an alternativ e to exercises such as clean and jerk to develop total
body power. To optimiz e this development of total body power , the
athlete should emphasiz e a powerf ul triple extension of the lower
extremities to gener ate sufficient momentum for the tire to continue
to rotate upward and forward before the push phase. This will also
require the selection of appropriately sized tires that allow this rapid
triple extensio n and transition to the push phase so that each
repetition is perf ormed r elatively quickly (~3-4 s).
Tire Flipping (Shoulders-Against-the-Tire
Technique): Common Technical Flaws and
Corrections
Flaw: Placing the f eet too close to the tir e when ini tiating the mo vement.
When this occurs, athletes often have to round their back and position their
knees close to their chest in or der to ini tiate the mo vement.
Correction : Have athletes move their feet away from the tire, and instruct
them to brace their spine and use a forceful triple extension of the lower
extremities that r aises their chest and tir e off the gr ound.
Flaw: Hips rise f aster than the shoulders during the ini tial pushing motion.
This flaw is very similar to what can be seen during traditional deadl ifting
with incorr ect technique.
Correction : Instruct athletes to keep their hips low and drive the tire forward
rather than l ifting i t.
Flaw: A lifting motion is used instead of a pushing motion.
1124
With heavier tires, this motion reduces the lifting speed; the tire will lose
momentum as it is elevated to hip height, forcing the athlete to “muscle” the
tire over. This position places substantial ly greater load on the biceps and the
risk of biceps injury , and the tire is also more likely to fall backw ard onto the
athlete.
Correction : The athlete should be encour aged to drive the tire forward and
move forward with the tire as it is elevated. One cue is to strike the tire with
the quadriceps at hip height and continue a f orward movement pat tern.
Adapted by permission from J.B. Bullock and D.M.M. Aipa, “Coaching Considerations for the Tire Flip,”
Strength and Conditioning Journal 32, no. 5 (2010): 76-77.
Log Lifting
One of the classic exercises that is a part of strongman training is
the log lift, which is essentially a version of the clean and overhead
press. Other traditional lifting movements can also be performed
with logs, such as cleans, presses, jerks, rows, squats, deadl ifts, and
lunges (59, 108, 156). Logs are typical ly made from metal and
designed to have weight added to them while offering a midrange
grip support to accommodate a neutral grip position (108). Weight is
typical ly added with the use of traditional plates, which eliminates
much of the need f or having a v ariety of logs (59).
The biomecha nics of the log lift have been examined in two
studies (110, 155). Using six strongman athletes, Winwood and
colleagues (155) compar ed the log lift and clean and jerk, using
loads of 70% 1RM clean and jerk. Both exercises involved triple
extension of lower extremities and the production of high levels of
vertical force. The log lift produced significantly greater impulse as
well as hip and trunk range of motion but significantly less vertical
velocity and power than the clean and jerk. Such differences
probably reflected the greater challenges in rapidly moving the body
and the log due to its greater diameter than the barbel l. Such a view
is suppo rted by Renals and colleagues (110), whereby a thinner log
(250 mm [1.0 in.] diamete r) allowed 10 strongman athletes to
produce significantly greater power , velocity, and force than a thicker
log (316 mm [1.2 in. ] diameter).
1125