# Section 17.3

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 17: Alternative Modes and Nontraditional Implement Training

**Section:** 17.3 -- Variable-Resistance Training

**PDF Pages:** 1126--1145

Weighted Carries
Strongman competi tions commonly involve a range of weighted
carries  including the farmer ’s walk, yoke walk, or sandbag or keg
carries, with regular gym programs potential ly also involving Zercher
carries (using a barbel l held across the elbows on the upper
abdominals) or unilateral carries in which the load is held overhead
or by one hip (i.e., suitcase carry). A primary advantage of these
exercises is that they often involve horizontal motion and unilateral
ground contact  and require coordinated activity of many muscles of
the body. Weighted carries may therefore develop total body and
trunk stability, grip strength (for farmer ’s walks) as well as the ability
to produce high levels of anterior –posterior and vertical impulse to
initiate propulsion and to be able to absorb these forces on impact at
heel strike (163). These exercises therefore may mimic performance
in a range of occupational and sporting demands (62, 87) or create
substantial metabolic demands that can be exploi ted in a metabol ic
or anaer obic condi tioning circuit (55, 163). The following exercises
are common weighted carries.
Farmer’s walk:  The farmer ’s walk requires the athlete to
hold a load at the sides in each hand while walking forward
(87, 147). The farmer ’s walk can be performed with static
loads (e.g., farmer ’s bar handles or a heavy dumbbel l) or
variable loads (e.g., water-filled objects) (147). Regardless of
the type of load used, the farmer ’s walk offers a unique
activation pattern of the core (87), although resear ch in the
scienti fic literature is very limited in supporting the use of this
exercise as a strength and condi tioning tool. Two
biomechanical studies of the farmer ’s walk have been
performed (71, 154). Winwood and colleagues (154)
demonstr ated significantly greater vertical and anterior forces
in the liftoff phase of the farmer ’s walk than the deadl ift, as
well as significantly larger forces and shorter ground contact
times and swing times in the farmer ’s walk than unloaded
1126
walking. Keogh and colleagu es (71) identi fied that compar ed
to slower trials, the fastest trials had significantly greater
stride length and r ate and r educed gr ound contact time.
Yoke walk:  The yoke walk is another common strongman
event whereby a heavy frame is carried on the shoulde rs of
the athlete over a set distan ce. As McGill and colleagues (87)
observ ed significantly greater spinal compr ession forces during
the performance of the yoke walk when compar ed to six other
strongman events, it is likely that this exercise has the
potential to challenge and improve core stability. Howev er, it
must be performed with appropriate loads and technique to
reduce the risk of injury , especial ly since Winwood and
colleagues (154) reported that 213 strongman athletes ranked
this exercise as the second most danger ous strongman lift in
terms of injury risk. Similar to the farmer ’s walk (71), faster
yoke walks were characteriz ed by increased stride length and
stride rate, lower limb range of motion, and reduced ground
contact time (61). Based on the impulse–momen tum
relationship , it would appear that weighted carries (e.g.,
farmer ’s and yoke walks) require the production of high levels
of anterior –posterior and vertical forces over short contact
times, perhaps suggesting some potential to improve
horizontal motion such as acceleration sprinting or initiating
body contact in tackling or blocking opponents in contact or
combat sports.
Sandbag carries: Limited resear ch has exam ined frontal
carries including sandbags and water bags in athletic
populations (22, 60). Calata yud and colleagues (22) compar ed
the muscle activity (anterior deltoid, external oblique, lumbar
erector spinae , and gluteus medius) associated with the
performance of 20-kilogram (44 lb) clean and jerks with either
a barbel l, sandbag, or water bag in 21 male university
students. While no significant differences were observed
between the muscle activity when lifting a barbel l or sandbag,
1127
the water bag version resulted in significantly greater external
oblique, lumbar er ector spinae, and gluteus medius activ ation.
Unilateral carries:  Unilateral carries with the load positioned
overhead (e.g., kettlebel l or dumbbel l) or at the hip via a
kettlebel l, dumbbel l, or farmer’s handle (suitcase carry)
impose a unique frontal plane challenge to the athlete (87).
These carries may be advanced total body exercises that will
improve lateral trunk flexor muscles (e.g., obliques and
quadr atus lumborum) and scapular control, thereby allowing
better lateral stabilization of the spine than more traditional
exercises such as dumbbel l side bends or side planks.
Technique Tips for Weighted Carries
Irrespectiv e of where the load is positioned on the body, the athlete should look to
move in a similar way to normal walking. For example, during the carrying
component of the exercise, the athlete should retain a predominantly neutral and
vertical spinal position with no substan tial hyperextension, flexion, or lateral spinal
flexion. The athlete  should use loads that challenge his or her desired walking
speed, step length, step rate, and ground contact time but are still within his or
her ability to maintain core and total body stability. In order to achiev e this, the
athlete will need to concentr ate on keeping the loads in the same relative position
to his or her center of mass throughou t the carry. To achiev e this, the athlete will
need to stiffen the spine in response  to the likely perturbations these awkward
loads impose on the system during the walking phase. This may require some
breath holding, which can be challengin g due to the high spinal compr essive forces
(especial ly observ ed in the yoke walk) or if the load is positioned on the chest as in
Zercher, sandbag, and keg carries, because such loads can further restrict typical
respiration pat terns.
Kettlebell Training
Recently , strength and condi tioning professionals have become
interested in the use of kettlebell  exercises (11, 23, 83). While
seemingly a new phenomen on, the use of kettlebel ls dates back
hundr eds of years to when they were a popular training method in
various Eastern Bloc countrie s (57). The word kettlebel l comes from
the Russian word girya, which refers to a cast iron cannonbal l with a
1128
handle on it (28). In Western literature the term kettlebel l is used to
refer to a weighted impleme nt consisting of a ball with a handle,
which is pr obably bet ter termed a kettlebal l (28).
Along with the increasing interest in the use of kettlebel l training
has been an increase in the amount of scienti fic inquir y into the
efficacy of using these implements with athletes and gener al
populations. The majori ty of the scienti fic evidence supporting the
use of kettlebel ls highlights their potential usefulness as a tool for
gener al physical or fitness development (38, 65). In these studies,
the most common exercise employed is the kettlebel l swing, which
can be performed with either one or two hands (65, 87, 137). While
kettlebel l swing s appear to have a positive impact on cardiovascular
fitness, it is important to note that this activity does not offer the
same level of cardiovascular benefi t as treadmi ll running or more
traditional aer obic ex ercise (65).
Currently, limited resear ch explor es the efficacy of kettlebel l
training as a strength development tool. When used with clinical and
recreational ly trained populations, kettlebel l training has been
reported to increase muscular strength levels compar ed to no
training (68, 103). Additional ly, when a battery of kettlebel l exercises
(i.e., swings, goblet squats, accelerated swings) is performed across
a six-week training interv ention, there appears to be an increase in
muscular strength and vertical jump performance in recreational ly
trained men (103). Howev er, these strength gains are significantly
lower than those typical ly seen with traditional weightl ifting-based
training methods. Specifically, Otto and colleagues (103) reported
that six weeks of weightl ifting training resulted in a 4% increase in
vertical jump performance, while kettlebel l swings increased jumping
performance by only 0.8%. Additional ly, back squat strength was
increased by 13.6% after six weeks of traditional weightl ifting
training, while the kettlebel l training resulted in only a 4.5% increase
(103).
Based on the contempor ary body of scienti fic knowledge, it
appears that kettlebel ls are probably best used as gener al
1129
preparation exercise and that more traditional training methods such
as weightl ifting are more effective for developing maximal strength
and jumping performance capaci ty. Howev er, further scienti fic
resear ch is needed to develop a better understanding of the role
that k ettlebel ls ma y be able to pla y in the dev elopment of athletes.
Types of Kettlebells
When working with kettlebells, one must consider the type of
kettlebel l, of which there are two: the cast iron (figure 17.9) and the
sport kettlebel l (figure 17.10) (28). The cast iron, or fitness,
kettlebel ls are cast from iron and range in size dependin g on their
weight. The sport or competi tion kettlebel ls are made from steel and
have universal design and measur ements. Specifically, the size of the
kettlebel l does not change regardless of the weight, and the various
weights are indicated by different colors (28). Besides the structur al
differences in the size and dimensions of the cast iron and sport
kettlebel l, the other difference is that the cast iron kettlebel l is less
expensiv e and probably more prevalent in strength and condi tioning
facilities.
FIGURE 17.9  Cast ir on class k ettlebel ls.
1130
FIGURE 17.10  Competi tion k ettlebel ls.
Competition Kettlebell Dimensions
Following ar e the dimensions of competi tion k ettlebel ls (28):
Height : 228 mm (9.0 in. )
Diameter : 210 mm (8.3 in. )
Handle diameter : 35 mm (1.4 in. )
Considerations for Selecting Kettlebells
The first major consider ation in the selection of a kettlebel l is the
type of load provided. The two basic types of kettlebel ls are the fixed
and the adjustable (28). With fixed-loaded kettlebel ls, such as cast
iron or competi tion kettlebel ls, the load stays constant; thus, a set of
kettlebel ls, which range across several loads, is required in order to
provide training variety. Adjustable kettlebel ls are either plate loaded
or shot loaded. In actual ity, a plate-loaded kettlebel l is simply a
handle that is attached to weight plates and is not really a kettlebel l
even though it is classified as one (28). In contrast, a shot-loaded
kettlebel l is a hollow version of the more traditional kettlebel l.
Historical ly, these kettlebel ls were filled with sand, water, lead, and
even mercury (28). If this type of kettlebel l is only partial ly filled, the
shot moves around in the ball, causing an increased training stressor.
While popular  in the early 20th century , especial ly with circus
strongmen such as the famous Arthur Saxon and Eugen Sandow ,
this type of kettlebel l is not popular in contempor ary strength and
condi tioning.
1131
The second consider ation relates to the handle, because it is the
major interface between the athlete and the kettlebel l. With cast iron
kettlebel ls, the handle diameter changes slightly as the weight
increases. For example, a 20-kilogram (44 lb) or heavier kettlebel l
has a handle between 33 (1.3 in.) and 35 (1.4 in.) millimeters; a
smaller kettlebel l may have a smaller handle diameter . Additional ly,
to facilitate the types of exercises that use kettlebel ls, the spacing
between the handle and the top of the ball is standar dized in good
kettlebel ls. Typical ly, the space between the bottom of the handle
and the top of the ball is 55 millimeters (2.2 in.), and the length of
the handle is 186 millimeter s (7.3 in.) (28). With regard to handle
surface, some kettlebel ls come with smooth painted handles; others
have polished steel handles, which have no paint and are basical ly
bare metal. The polished steel handle tends to allow for a better grip
because it holds chalk better and does not get as slippery as painted
or pol ished handles do when athletes sweat on them (28).
Landmine Exercises
The landmine  resistance training device is a useful device for
performing loaded rotational  resistance training exercises (4). The
performance of this exercise involves placing the end of a standar d
Olympic barbe ll (i.e., 20 kg [44 lb]) into a metal cylinder that is
attached to a standar d squat rack or stand- alone base attachment
through a universal joint (4). With this set-up, the barbel l is used as
a lever and is rotated around the fixed end, allowing for loaded
rotational movements to be performed (4). Alternativ ely, if a
purpose-bui lt receptacle is not available, one end of the barbel l can
be placed in contact with the floor at the corner of a wall and a
similar movement pattern can be performed (148). Regardless of the
how the barbel l is anchor ed, additional resistance can be added to
the free end of the barbel l, thus allowing for the application of
variable and multiplanar resistance during rotational movements (26,
80, 167).
1132
Additional ly, the landmine device can be used to perform a variety
of exercises including the landmine row (80), Romanian deadl ift
(RDL) (85), squat (26, 114), press (135), and squat to press (69).
While these exercises have become commonly implemented as part
of the resistance training practices of many athletes (4), there is a
paucity of scienti fic resear ch exploring the actual physiological
impact and efficacy of these exercises. As such, significantly more
resear ch is warranted to understand the unique training stimulus
provided b y landmine ex ercises.
Sled Training
In addition to the training studies incorpor ating sleds as a part of the
condi tioning program, several studies have examined the acute
responses to sled ex ercise (72, 150, 152, 160).
Keogh and colleagues (72) sought to describe the spatiotempor al
characteristics of the heavy sled pull, using six resistance-tr ained
subjects with experience in the heavy sled pull. Participants
performed 3 25-meter (27 yd) sets of sled pulls with 171.2 kilograms
(377 lb), with 3 minutes of rest between sets. Several significant
differences were observ ed between the acceleration (the start
through 5 m [5 yd]) and maximum velocity (20-25 m [22-27 yd])
phases, with average velocity, step length, swing time, and a range
of segm ent and joint angles being significantly greater in the
maximum velocity than acceleration phase. The fastest trials also
had significant ly greater step length, swing times, and trunk and
knee angles at certain positions than slower trials. These acute
responses would potential ly underl ie some of the mechanisms
contributing to the chronic improvements in sprinting performance
seen wi th hea vy sled pul ls (96).
West (150) examined the acute effects of five sets of 2 × 20-
meter (21 yd) reverse sled pulls using loads of 75% of body mass
with 11 resistance-tr ained  men. Participants were retested
immediately , 15 minutes, 1 hour, 3 hours, and 24 hours after
completing the sled pulls. Peak countermo vement jump power was
1133
significantly decreased and blood lactate significantly increased
(peaking at 12.4 mmol/L immediately after) for a period of 1 hour,
with no significant changes in creatine kinase at any time point.
Testoster one and cortisol tended to increase at 15 minutes after
(signi ficant only for testoster one), with no significant changes in the
testoster one-to-cortisol ratio observ ed. Such results suggest that
concentr ated sled pull exercises can produce profound metabol ic
fatigue and short-term hormonal augmentation with no muscle
damage. The relatively quick recovery and lack of muscle damage
(perhaps due to the concentric -dominant nature of this exercise)
may indicate that lower and upper body sled exercises could be a
key component of a resistance training program when athletes’
recovery abilities are particularly challenged, such as when they are
performing large volumes of concurr ent training or competing
several times per week.
Winwood and colleagues (160) and Williams and colleagues (152)
have examined the potential of moder ate to heavy sled pulls to
produce a postactiv ation potentiation enhancement (PAPE) sprinting
effect in adult semi-el ite rugby (75%-150% body mass) and
adolescent high school soccer players (loads producing a velocity
decline of 40%-50% that equated to 66%-70% body mass),
respectiv ely. Some significant PAPE effects were observ ed that
resulted in significant reducti ons in 15-meter (16 yd) sprint times by
Williams and colleagues (152) and Winwood and colleagues (160).
Howev er, the significant PAPE benefi t for Winwood and colleagues
(160) was only observ ed using 75% body mass loads and at 12
minutes after completing the sled pulls. The studies therefore
suggest that sled pulls with loads between 66% and 75% of body
mass have the potential to produce 15-meter sprint PAPE effects in a
variety of running athletes.
1134
Unilateral Training
When employing training methods, one can use unilateral or bilateral
training interv entions. These types of training methods can be
performed with the upper body or lower body, depending on the
targeted outco mes. Common lower body unilateral training exercises
include lunges, step-ups, and the single-leg squat, which is
sometimes referred to as the Bulgarian split squat . This exercise
isolates one leg and is typical ly used in the preparation of athletes
from numer ous sports. Typical ly, these types of exercises are
integr ated into training programs with varying degrees of emphasis
(86) in an attempt to reduce bilateral asymmetries  (75) or as a
rehabi litation tool (37). They are often used to reduce a bilateral
deficit , where asymmetries in force production are observ ed
between unilateral and bilateral movements (67). It has also been
demonstr ated that bilateral movements exhibi t a bilateral
facilitation  in which voluntary activation of the agonist muscle
group increases (12, 117). Trained or stronger individuals tend to
exhibi t a bilateral facilitation, while untrained, injured, or weaker
athletes exhib it a bilateral deficit (14). Therefore, based on the
bilateral facilitation response , trained individuals should not use
unilateral methods as the primary strategy to develop strength. In
contrast, unilateral training methods may be useful for strength
development wi th untr ained, weak er, and injur ed individuals (14).
Trained or stronger individuals exhibit a bilateral
facilitation during bilateral exercises, while untra ined,
injured, or weaker individuals exhibit a bilateral deficit.
1135
Conclusion
In designing strength and condi tioning interv entions, one can use a
variety of methods to apply overload. The use of alternativ e methods
and nontraditional implements is increasing in populari ty. When
choosing to implement these methods, strength and condi tioning
professionals should consider the benefi ts and weaknesses of these
types of training interv ention s. Additional ly, the level of the athlete
dictates whether use of these methods is warranted. For example, a
novice athlete or untrained individual may derive a large benefi t
from doing bodyweight or core stability exercises. Conversely , the
trained or elite athlete may experience greater gains with traditional
ground-based free weight exercises. With the advanced athlete, the
use of variable resistance may also allow for a greater training
stimulus to be applied to traditional training methods. If choosing to
emplo y alternative methods or nontraditional element –based training
methods, strength and conditioning professionals must always
ensur e that they teach proper exercise techniques as well as
constantly monitor their athletes to ensur e that a safe training
environment is maintained.
ALTERNATIVE MODES AND
NONTRADITIONAL EXERCISES
BODYWEIGHT EXERCISES
  1  Front Plank   498
  2  Side Plank   498
  3  Suspension T rainer Chest Pr ess  499
  4  Suspension T rainer I nverted R ow  500
  5  Suspension T rainer Y Pul l  501
1136
CORE STABILITY AND BALANCE TRAINING
EXERCISES
  6  Stability Ball Rollout  502
  7  Stability Ball Pike  503
  8  Stability Ball Jackkni fe  504
STRONGMAN EXERCISES
  9  Tire Flip  505
10  Log Clean and Pr ess  506
11  Yoke Walk  508
12  Sandbag Carry   509
13  Zercher Carry   510
14  Forward Sled Push and Pul l  512
15  Reverse Sled Dr ag  514
OTHER ALTERNATIVE EXERCISES
16  Back S quat Wi th Bands   515
17  Accentuated Ec centrical ly Loaded B ench Pr ess  516
18  Landmine R otation   517
19  Single- Arm Landmine R ow  518
20  Landmine S quat to Pr ess  519
21  Two-Arm K ettlebel l Swing   520
22  Single-Leg S quat   521
23  Single-Leg R omanian Deadl ift (RDL)   522
24  One-Arm Dumbbel l Snatch   523
Bodyweight Exercises
  1  FRONT PLANK
Starting Position
1137
Kneel in a prone, quadruped position on the floor. The feet
should be hip-width apart or slightly closer , with the palms of
the hands flat on the floor shoulder -width apart and the elbows
pointing backw ard.
Drop the elbows to the floor and position them directly under
the shoulders.
Move the feet back one at a time to allow the hips and knees to
extend so the abdomen and the front of the hips and legs rest
on the floor .
Ending Position
Elevate the hips so the ankles , knees, hips, shoulders, and head
are in a str aight l ine.
Isometrical ly hold the torso in a rigid position with the elbows
under the shoulders and the head in a neutr al posi tion.
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
rectus abdominis, internal obliques, external obliques,
erector spinae
1138
  2  SIDE PLANK
Starting Position
Lie on the floor on the left side.
Position the left elbow undern eath the left shoulder with the left
forearm perpendicular to the body .
Stack the right foot on top of the left foot with the right leg
evenly on top of the left leg, or place the right foot on the floor
immediately in front of the left foot. Also, stack the right arm
evenly on top of the right side of the torso .
Position the head in a neutral position with the eyes focused
forward.
Ending Position
Elevate the hips off the floor so the left ankle, knee, hip, and
shoulder ar e in a str aight l ine.
Isometrical ly hold the torso in a rigid position with the left
elbow under the left shoulder and the head in a neutral
position.
Switch and r epeat the pr ocedur e for the right side.
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
internal obliques, external obliques
1139
  3  SUSPENSION TRAINER CHEST
PRESS
Starting Position
Assume a position away from the anchor point while grabbing
the handles of the suspension tr ainer in each hand.
With the elbows extended, move the hands and feet shoulder -
width apart while placing the body into a straight line, or plank
position.
Brace the trunk and slowly step back until there is tension on
the str aps and the body is in an incl ined posi tion.
Movement
Initiate the movement by flexing the elbows and lowering the
chest, simi lar to a push-up .
Ending Position
At the end of the movement the chest should be between the
suspension tr ainer’s handles.
1140
Extend the elbows to r eturn to the starting posi tion.
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
pectoralis major, anterior deltoid, triceps brachii, rectus
abdominis, internal obliques, external obliques, erector
spinae
  4  SUSPENSION TRAINER INVERTED
ROW
Starting Position
Face the anchor point while grabbing the handles of the
suspension trainer with the palms of the hands facing each
other or upw ard.
While maintaining a neutral body position, lean back while
simultaneously allowing the arms to extend in front of the body
until they ar e at or abo ve shoulder height.
Movement
Pull the torso toward the hands by flexing at the elbows and
extending the shoulders. Throughout the movement, maintain a
1141
straight body postur e.
Ending Position
The elbows ar e flex ed, and the hands ar e next to the chest.
Extend the elbows, and lower the torso back to the starting
position.
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
latissimus dorsi, rhomboids, biceps
  5  SUSPENSION TRAINER Y PULL
Starting Position
Face the anchor point while grabbing the handles of the
suspension trainer with the palms of the hands facing each
other.
While maintaining a neutral body position, lean back while
simultaneously allowing the arms to extend in front of the body
until they ar e at or abo ve shoulder height.
Movement
1142
Without flexing the elbows, flex the shoulders while pushing the
hands overhead in a diagonal movement pattern to form a Y
with the arms and body .
Throughout the mo vement, maintain a str aight body postur e.
Ending Position
At the top of the mo vement the arms and body should f orm a Y .
After pausing in this position, slowly lower the body back to the
starting posi tion.
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
latissimus dorsi, rhomboids, trapezius, posterior deltoid
Core Stability and Balance Training
Exercises
  6  STABILITY BALL ROLLOUT
Starting Position
1143
Kneel facing the stability ball with the upper body in an upright
position, the elbows fully extended, and the hands touching the
ball.
While keeping the hands on the ball, create a 90-degr ee angle
at the knees and ankles with the knees, hips, and shoulders in a
near-vertical plane.
Ending Position
Keep the knees and toes on the floor; elbows fully extended;
arms parallel to each other; and knees, hips, and shoulde rs in a
straight l ine.
Extend the knees and flex the shoulders to roll the ball forward
and the arms across the top of the ball until it comes very close
to the f ace.
Isometrical ly hold the torso in a rigid position; do not let the
hips sag tow ard the floor .
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
rectus abdominis, iliopsoas
  7  STABILITY BALL PIKE
Starting Position
Kneel down in f ront of a stabi lity ball.
1144
Position the body f acing a way from the bal l.
In a quadruped position with the hands underneath the
shoulders and the knees extended, place both feet on the
stability ball.
Isometrical ly hold the torso in a rigid position with the elbows
fully extended and the head in a neutr al posi tion.
All repetitions begin f rom this posi tion.
Upward Movement Phase
Keeping the knees and elbow s fully extended and the torso in a
rigid position, begin the exercise by flexing the hips to roll the
ball toward the chest.
Continue lifting the hips until the toes are on top of the ball and
the hips ar e directly o ver the shoulders.
Keep the head in a neutr al posi tion.
Downward Movement Phase
Return to the starting position by allowing the hips to extend
under contr ol.
Keep the knees and elbows fully extended and the torso held
rigid.
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
rectus abdominis, iliopsoas
1145