# Section 17.5

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 17: Alternative Modes and Nontraditional Implement Training

**Section:** 17.5 -- Unilateral Training

**PDF Pages:** 1166--1185

Lower the barbel l under control to reduce the movement of the
weight r eleasers.
The weight releasers will disengage from the barbel l about 2 to
4 inches (5-10  cm) before touching the chest at approximately
nipple lev el.
Keep the wrists stiff and the forearms perpendicular to the floor
and par allel to each other .
Maintain the fiv e-point body contact posi tion.
Upward Movement Phase
Push the barbel l upward and very slightly backw ard as fast as
possible unti l the elbows ar e fully extended.
Keep the wrists stiff and the forearms perpendicular to the floor
and par allel to each other .
Maintain the fiv e-point body contact posi tion.
Do not ar ch the back or r aise the chest to meet the bar .
At the end of the set, signal the spotter for assistance in racking
the bar .
Keep a grip on the bar unti l it is racked.
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
pectoralis major, anterior deltoids, triceps brachii
  18  LANDMINE ROTATION
Starting Position
Stand facing the free end of the barbel l, then squat down to
grasp the end of the barbel l sleeve with both hands (not
shown) and pick i t up.
After standing, press the free end of the barbel l up to position it
in front of the midline of the body approximately level with the
eyes.
Stand with the feet approximately shoulder -width apart and
knees sl ightly flex ed.
1166
The body weight should be shifted to the balls of the feet but
with the heels r emaining in contact wi th the floor .
Brace the trunk with the head and spine in a neutral position
(4).
Rotate to the Left
Lower the bar by rotating to the left while also allowing the
torso, hips, and back foot (i.e., the foot opposi te the direction of
the bar rotation) to rotate in the same direction of the barbell
(4) (somewhat mor e than what is shown).
Return to the Starting Position
Using a forceful and rapid motion, rotate the bar back to the
starting position while keeping the torso and hips aligned with a
neutral head posi tion.
During this motion keep the arms extended and in front of the
torso throughout the rotational elevation of the barbel l while
returning to the starting posi tion (4).
Rotate to the Right
Lower the bar by rotating to the right while also allowing the
torso, hips, and back foot (i.e., the foot opposi te the direction of
the bar rotation) to rotate in the same direction of the barbell
(4) (somewhat mor e than what is shown).
Return to the Starting Position
Using a forceful and rapid motion, rotate the bar back to the
starting position while keeping the torso and hips aligned with a
neutral head posi tion.
During this motion keep the arms extended and in front of the
torso throughout the rotational elevation of the barbel l while
returning to the starting posi tion (4).
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
rectus abdominis, obliques, erector spinae
1167
1168
  19  SINGLE-ARM LANDMINE ROW
Setup and Starting Position
While standing facing away from the axis of rotation of the
landmine barbel l, assume a hip-width stance with the unfixed
side of the barbell just outside of the working-side leg with the
toes behind the barbel l sleev e.
While maintain ing a 25- to 45-degr ee knee angle, hinge at the
hips until able to grasp the end of the barbel l with one hand
while the elbow is extended and reaching down ward. In this
position the forward trunk inclination should be roughly 30 to
60 degrees relative to the ground. This trunk angle should
remain constant thr oughout the mo vement (80).
Upward Movement Phase
The upward movement phase (i.e., concentric phase) is initiated
from the starting position and ends at the top position where
the barbell reaches the greatest angle relative to the floor and
contacts the torso .
Throughout this motion remain stationary with an
approximately neutral axial alignment while simultaneously
retracting the shoulder girdle, extending the glenohumer al joint,
and flexing the elbow to pull the barbel l along the natural arc of
the landmine barbel l device (80).
Downward Movement Phase
Allow the shoulder girdle to protract, the glenohumer al joint to
flex, and the elbow to exten d simultaneously to return to the
starting posi tion (80).
Note:  As part of a balanced training program, this movemen t is
performed on both sides of the body .
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
1169
latissimus dorsi, trapezius, teres major, posterior deltoid,
triceps brachii, rhomboids, brachioradialis, biceps brachii,
brachialis
  20  LANDMINE SQUAT TO PRESS
Setup and Starting Position
1170
Stand facing the axis of rotation of the landmine barbel l with a
slight forward lean, while assuming a shoulder -width stance
with the knees slightly flexed and grasping the end of the bar
with one hand.
The bar should be positioned about 4 to 6 inches (10.2-15.2
cm) away from the shoulder of the arm that is holding the bar
(135). The other arm is held out to the side of the body and
used f or balance during the ex ercise.
Downward Movement Phase
Begin the exercise by flexin g the hips and knees slowly and
under control while keeping the torso-to-floor angle relatively
constant.
Maintain a flat-foot position with the knees aligned over the feet
as they flex.
Continue flexin g the hips and knees until the thighs are parallel
to the floor, the torso begins to round or flex forward, or the
heels begin to rise of f the floor .
Upward Movement Phase
Extend the hips and knees while keeping the torso-to-floor
angle r elatively constant.
Keep the torso er ect, shoulders back, and chest up and out.
Keep the heels on the floor and the knees al igned o ver the f eet.
Continue extending the hips and knees; as the fully-standing
position is reached, press the bar up and slightly forward until
the elbow of the arm holding the bar is fully extended; full knee
and elbow extension should be attained at about the same
time.
Return to the Starting Position
Keeping the lower body and torso stationary , slowly lower the
bar in a controlled manner until it is returned to the starting
position.
1171
Note:  As part of a balanced training program, this movemen t is
performed on both sides of the body .
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
gluteus maximus, semimembranosus, semitendinosus,
biceps femoris, vastus lateralis, vastus intermedius, vastus
medialis, rectus femoris, deltoid (anterior, medial, and
posterior), trapezius, triceps brachii
1172
1173
  21  TWO-ARM KETTLEBELL SWING
Starting Position
Stand with feet flat and placed between hip- and shoulder -width
apart with the toes pointed straight ahead, straddling a
kettlebel l.
Squat down with the hips lower than the shoulders and grasp
the kettlebel l with a closed, pr onated grip .
Place the hands on the kettlebell with index fingers touching or
close together , inside of the legs, keeping the elbows fully
extended.
Position the body with the back in a neutral spine position,
shoulders retracted and depressed, feet flat on the floor, and
eyes focused str aight ahead or sl ightly upw ard.
Maintain a neutral spine or normal lordotic position while flexing
the hips and knees to approximately a quarter -squat position,
with the k ettlebel l hanging at arm’ s length between the thighs.
All repetitions begin f rom this posi tion.
Backward Movement Phase
Begin the exercise by flexing  at the hips to swing the kettlebel l
between the legs.
Keep the knees in a moder ately flexed position with the back
neutral and the elbows extended.
Keep swinging the kettlebel l backw ard until the torso is nearly
parallel to the floor and the kettlebel l is past the vertical line of
the body .
Forward and Upward Movement Phase
When the backward swing reaches its end point, reverse the
movement by extending the hips and knees to move the
kettlebel l in an upw ard arc.
1174
Allow momentu m to raise the kettlebel l to eye level, keepin g the
elbows extended and the back in a neutr al spine posi tion.
Downward and Backward Movement Phase
Allow the kettlebel l to drop into the downswing; flex the hips
and knees to absorb the weight. Keep the elbows fully extended
and the back neutr al.
Continue the down ward-then-backw ard movement until the
kettlebel l passes under then behind the body, then begin the
upward movement phase f or the next r epetition.
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
gluteus maximus, semimembranosus, semitendinosus,
biceps femoris, vastus lateralis, vastus intermedius, vastus
medialis, rectus femoris
1175
  22  SINGLE-LEG SQUAT
Note:  The single-leg squat is not typical ly done with a spotter. If
spotting is needed, two spotters are used with one on each side of
the bar. The positions of the spotters are not pictur ed in order to
show the athlete’ s position at the various stages of the single-leg
squat mor e clearly .
Starting Position: Athlete
Grasp a barbel l with a closed, pronated grip (for dumbbel l
variation, hold dumbbel ls with a closed, neutral grip with a
dumbbel l in each hand).
Stand in front of a bench or box that is approximately knee
height wi th the f eet appr oximately shoulder - to hip- width apart.
Facing away from the bench or box, take a moder ate step
forward with one leg and place the instep of the back foot on
top of the bench or bo x.
Allow both knees to be slightly flexed, with the torso in a nearly
erect position and the shoulders held back and chest up and
out.
All repetitions begin f rom this posi tion.
Starting Position: Two Spotters
The spotters should stand erect at opposi te ends of the bar with
the feet hip- width apart and the knees sl ightly flex ed.
Hold the hands 2 to 3 inches (5-8 cm) below the end of the bar .
Note:  If dumbbel ls are used, no spot ter is needed.
Downward Movement Phase: Athlete
Flex the hip and knee of the forward leg simultaneou sly to
lower the body in a vertical plane while keeping the torso-to-
floor angle constant.
Keep the heel of the forward foot flat on the floor and the
instep of the back f oot on top of the bench or bo x.
1176
Continue flexin g the hip and knee until the front thigh is
approximately par allel to the floor .
Downward Movement Phase: Two Spotters
Keep the cupped hands close to but not touching the bar as it
descends.
Slightly flex the knees, hips, and torso to keep a neutral spine
position when f ollowing the bar .
Upward Movement Phase: Athlete
Raise the bar under control by actively extending the forward
hip and knee; extend the other hip and knee also to keep the
torso-to-floor angle constant.
Maintain a neutr al spine posi tion and k eep the torso upright.
Keep the f orward knee al igned o ver the f orward foot.
Do not flex the torso f orward or r ound the spine.
Continue exten ding the hip and knee of the forward leg to
reach the starting posi tion.
Repeat for the desired numb er of repetitions and then switch
the forward leg.
Upward Movement Phase: Two Spotters
Keep cupped hands close to but not touching the bar as it
ascends.
Slightly extend  the knees, hips, and torso and keep the back
neutral when f ollowing the bar .
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
gluteus maximus, semimembranosus, semitendinosus,
biceps femoris, vastus lateralis, vastus intermedius, vastus
medialis, rectus femoris
1177
  23  SINGLE-LEG ROMANIAN DEADLIFT
(RDL)
1178
Note:  This exercise can be performed with the weight held in the
hand of the same side of the body as the support leg (ipsilateral) or
in the hand of the opposi te side of the body as the support leg
(contr alater al). The description and the photos describe the
contralater al single-leg RDL.
Starting Position
With the right hand, grasp a dumbbel l or kettlebel l with a
closed, pr onated grip .
Stand on the left leg (as the support leg) with the hips and
shoulders o ver the left f oot.
Hold the dumbbel l or kettlebell in front of the right thigh with
the right elbow fully exten ded and the right foot slightly
stagger ed back.
All repetitions begin f rom this posi tion.
Downward Movement Phase
Allow the left support knee to flex until it reaches a mode rately
flexed position, and then rigidly hold that position throughout
the mo vement.
Begin the exercise by allowing the torso to flex forward at the
hip of the left support leg.
Keep the right shoulder , hip, knee, and ankle in one line as the
torso flex es forward.
Keep the back neutr al and the right elbow sti ll fully extended.
Lower the dumbbel l or kettlebell until the torso and right leg are
approximately par allel to the floor .
Upward Movement Phase
Extend the hip of the left support leg to return to the starting
position.
Do not hyperextend the torso or flex the elbow holdin g the
dumbbel l or kettlebel l.
Repeat for the desired numb er of repetitions and then switch
the support leg.
1179
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
gluteus maximus, semimembranosus, semitendinosus,
biceps femoris
  24  ONE-ARM DUMBBELL SNATCH
Starting Position
Straddle a dumbbel l and place the feet between hip- and
shoulder -width apart wi th the toes pointed sl ightly outw ard.
Squat down with the hips lower than the shoulders; grasp the
dumbbel l with a closed, pronated grip and the elbow fully
extended.
All repetitions begin with the back neutral or slightly arched,
scapulae depressed and retracted, and chest held up and out.
The head is in line with the vertebr al column or slightly
hyperextended and the body’s weight balanced between the
1180
middle and balls of the feet with feet flat on the floor. The eyes
are focused straight ahead or slightly upward. The shoulders of
the hand that is holding the dumbbel l should be placed over or
slightly in f ront of the dumbbel l.
Upward Movement Phase
Begin the exercise by extending the knees, hips, and ankles
forcefully to ac celerate the dumbbel l.
The dumbbell should slide up the thigh or remain very close to
the thigh as i t accelerates upw ard.
Keep the elbow of the arm holding the dumbbel l fully extended
as the knees, hips, and ankles ar e extending.
Once the knees, hips, and ankles reach full extension, rapidly
shrug the shoulder of the arm holding the dumbbel l.
As the shoulder reaches its highest elevation, flex the elbow
holding the dumbbel l and k eep it close to the torso .
Keep the arm that is not holding the dumbbel l on the opposi te
hip or held to the side.
Continue pul ling the dumbbel l as high as possible.
Catch Phase
Pull the body under the dumb bell by rotating the arm and hand
holding the dumbbel l around then under the dumbbel l and by
flexing the hips and knees to approximately a quarter -squat
position.
Once the arm holding the dumbbel l is under the dumbbell,
extend the elbow quickly to push the dumbbel l up and the body
down ward under the dumbbel l.
Catch the dumbbel l in full extension at the same time the body
reaches the quarter -squat posi tion.
Keep the arm that is not holding the dumbbel l on the opposi te
hip or held to the side.
After gaining control and balance, stand up to a fully erect
position.
1181
Downward Movement Phase
Slowly allow the dumbbel l to lower to the shoulder , then the
thigh, and finally to the floor between the feet using a squatting
movement.
MAJOR MUSCLES INVOLVED
rectus femoris, vastus medialis, vastus lateralis, vastus
intermedius, gluteus maximus, semimembranosus,
semitendinosus, biceps femoris, deltoids, trapezius
KEY TERMS
accentuated ec centric loading (AEL)
accommodating r esistance
alternativ e modes
anatomical cor e
anterior cruciate l igament (ACL)
augmented ec centric loading
1182
axial sk eleton
bilateral asymmetries
bilateral defici t
bilateral facilitation
bodyweight tr aining
chains
constant external r esistance
core
farmer ’s walk
ground-based f ree weight ex ercises
isolation ex ercises
kettlebel l
landmine
log lift
logs
machine-based tr aining
muscle activ ation
nontraditional implement
resistance bands
sandbag carries
sticking point
strongman tr aining
suspension tr aining
unilateral carries
Valsalv a maneuv er
variable r esistance
weighted carries
yoke walk
STUDY QUESTIONS
  1.  What is the most common injury associated wi th tire flipping?
  a.  rotator cuf f tear
  b.  biceps tear
  c.  lower back str ain
1183
  d.  hamstring str ain
  2.  Which of the following statements about kettlebel l training is
most ac curate?
  a.  K ettlebel l training is pr oven to be mor e effective than
traditional weightl ifting f or str ength dev elopment.
  b.  Ther e is extensiv e resear ch demonstr ating the ef ficacy of
kettlebel l training as a str ength dev elopment tool.
  c.  Most of the scienti fic evidence supporting the use of
kettlebel ls highl ights their potential usef ulness f or gener al
physical or fi tness dev elopment.
  d.  K ettlebel l training is not appr opriate f or clinical or
recreational ly trained populations.
  3.  What is a potential solution to the limitation of resistance in
suspension tr aining?
  a.  wearing a weighted v est
  b.  using mul tiple anchor points
  c.  perf orming ex ercises on one leg instead of two
  d.  incorpor ating ply ometric mo vements
  4.  What is the recommended percentage of body mass for AEL
when trying to enhance performance during the conce ntric
phase of a ply ometric jumping ex ercise?
  a.  5%-10%
  b.  10%-20%
  c.  20%-30%
  d.  30%-40%
  5.  What is bi lateral facilitation?
  a.  the tendency f or str onger individuals to perf orm bet ter in
sports that r equire unilateral mo vements
  b.  an incr ease in v oluntary activ ation of the agonist muscle
group during bi lateral mo vements
  c.  the use of r esistance tr aining equipment that al lows f or
both uni lateral and bi lateral exercises
1184
  d.  an injury r ehabi litation pr otocol that f ocuses on
strengthening both l imbs equal ly
1185