# Chapter 18: Program Design for Resistance Training

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

**PDF Pages:** 1186--1259

CHAPTER  18
PROGRAM DESIGN FOR
RESISTANCE TRAINING
Timothy J. Suchomel, PhD, and Paul Comfort, PhD
The authors would like to acknowledge the significant contributions of Jeremy M. Sheppar d, N. Travis
Triplett, Thomas R. B aechle, R oger W . Earle, and Dan W athen to this chapter .
After completing this chapter, you will be able to
evaluate the r equirements and char acteristics of a sport and assess an
athlete f or the purpose of designing a r esistance tr aining pr ogram;
select ex ercises based on t ype, speci ficity, technique experience,
equipment a vailability, and time a vailability;
determine tr aining f requency based on tr aining status, sport season (i.e. ,
phase of the season), load, ex ercise type, and other concurr ent ex ercise;
arrange ex ercises in a tr aining session ac cording to their t ype;
determine 1-r epetition maximum (1RM), pr edicted 1RM f rom a mul tiple
RM, and RM loads;
assign load and r epetitions based on the tr aining goal;
know when and b y how much an ex ercise load should be incr eased;
assign tr aining v olumes ac cording to the athlete’ s training status and the
training goal; and
determine r est period lengths based on the tr aining goal.
Effective training programs involve the coordination of many variables in a
sequential and systematic fashion that enables the body to appropriately adapt
to specific exercise stimul i and subsequently improve performance. Having a
basic understanding of the physiological responses to various training stimul i is
essential for the strength and condi tioning professional to be able to coordinate
the various training aspects  successfully. When focusing on the resistance
1186
training component of a compr ehensiv e training program, it is helpful to
approach the task one program element at a time, keepin g in mind the primary
principles of anaer obic ex ercise pr escription.
1187
Principles of Anaerobic Exercise Prescription
Resistance training programs for athletic populations require attention to the
principles of specificity, overload, progression, variation, reversibility, and
individual ization. One of the most basic concepts to incorporate in all training
programs is specificity . The term, first suggested by DeLorme in 1945 (39),
refers to the method whereby an athlete is trained in a specific manner to
produce a specific adaptatio n or training outcome. In the case of resistance
training, specificity refers to aspects such as the muscles involved, the muscle
action (e.g., concentric, eccentric, and isometric), and the movement velocity
and coordination (i.e., movement pattern; this does not mean replicating specific
sporting movements), but it does not always reflect the combination of all these
aspects. Importantly , it does not mean that all aspects  of the training must
directly mimic that of the sporting skill. For example, a squat movement is
relevant to the vertical jump because it involves overcoming resistance in a
similar movement pattern (e.g., combined knee and hip flexion followed by
forceful knee and hip extens ion) and engages muscles (i.e., predominantly the
knee and hip extensors) that are involved in the vertical jump, yet the speed of
movement and force application are dispar ate between the squat and vertical
jump. Sometimes used interchangeably with specificity is the acronym SAID ,
which stands for specific adaptation to imposed demands.  The underlyi ng
principle is that the type of demand placed on the body dictates the type of
adaptation that will occur. For instance, athletes training for power in high-speed
movements (e.g., basebal l pitch or tennis serve) should attempt to activate or
recruit the same motor units required by their sport at the highest velocity
possible (160, 163). Additional ly, specific improvements  in force and velocity
characteristics may occur following heavy or ballistic resistance training, with
greater improvements in power production occurring in response to strength
training targeting increases in maximal strength in weak athletes (26, 28, 29).
Specificity also relates to the athlete’ s sport season. As an athlete progresses
through the preseason, in-season, and postseason, all forms of training should
gradual ly progress in an organized manner from general to specific (159).
Although participation in the sport itself provides the greatest opportuni ty to
improve performance in the sport, the proper application of the specificity
principle certainly increases the likelihood that other training will also positively
contribute to performance via the transference of training adaptations in the
gym to the sport -speci fic ski lls.
Overload  refers to the application of a training stimulus that exceeds what
the athlete is accustomed to (i.e., increased load, sets, or repetitions [i.e.,
volume]) and produces an adaptation beyond the baseline abilities of the
1188
athlete. Without an overload stimulus, even an otherwise well-designed program
greatly limits an athlete’ s ability to make improvements. The obvious application
of this principle in the design  of resistance training programs involves increasing
the loads assigned in the exercises, especial ly if the primary training goal is to
improve maximal strength. Other more subtle changes  include altering the
number of training sessions per week (or per day in some instances) or
increasing training volume  by adding exercises or sets, which may preferential ly
stimulate a hypertr ophic response (96, 143). Alternativ ely, varying exercise
choice, modifying rest period s between sets and exercises, or any combination
of these can result in an overload. The basis of the overload principle is to
provide the body with a unique training stimulus to facilitate the development of
the desired adaptations. Although an overload stimulus is typical ly thought of as
an increase of a given training variable (e.g., load, volume, velocity ), a
reduction in these variables may also provide the opportuni ty for adaptation to
take place. For example, a reduction in intensi ty (i.e., relative load) allows for an
increase in the speed of a movement, thus facilitating the development of rapid
force productio n characterist ics (i.e., speed–str ength). Alternativ ely, a reduction
in training volume while maintaining (or increasing) intensi ty during a deload
week may lead to an enhan cement in performance (figure 18.1) if a sufficient
stimulus (i.e., volume and intensi ty) has been applied previously . When the
overload principle is properly and systematical ly applied, and all other
components of training are consider ed (e.g., skill-based technical and tactical
training, condi tioning, and external stressors), overtraining can be avoided and
the desir ed training adaptation wi ll occur.
1189
FIGURE 18.1 Example of changes in fatigue and performance (i.e., fitness-f atigue paradigm) across a
mesocy cle with a deload week. As the volume load increases across the first three weeks; some
accumulation of fatigue occurs. Only once there is a reduction in volume load, during the deload week,
does the incr eased perf ormance mani fest.
If a training program is to continue producing higher levels of performance,
the intensity or volume (i.e., overload) of training must continue to provide a
unique stimulu s. Progression , when applied properly , with loading or volume
being sequenti al and specific to the desired adaptiv e response, promotes long-
term training benefi ts. Although it is customary to focus only on the resistance
used (i.e., intensi ty), one can progressively increase training volume by raising
the number of weekly training sessions, adding more drills or exercises to each
session, increasing the number of sets performed, or changing the type or
technical requirements of the drills or exercises. For example, an athlete may
progress from the front squat  and clean grip shoulder shrug to learning the hang
power clean and eventual ly the power clean through the use of a sequential
application of various training exercises that segment the key positions
associated with the lift (21). A key factor governing how training progression is
applied is that it must be based on the athlete’ s training needs and training
status and it needs to be introduced systematical ly and gradual ly. It is also
worth noting that progressively increasing volume tends to emphasiz e
hypertr ophic adaptations, whereas increasing intensi ty emphasiz es strength-
related adaptations (35, 97 , 125, 144).
1190
Variation  within resistance training programs focuses on removing lineari ty
by manipulating overload and specificity to promote the desired adaptations. For
example, strength and condi tioning professionals may introduce variation into a
training program by modifying volume, intensi ty, set configur ation, rest periods,
and exercise selection to provide a novel overload stimulus. These modifications
to a training program may help reduce training monoton y while also potential ly
reducing fatigue and providing a range of training stimul i. Regarding training
intensi ty, strength–power characteristics have been developed within training
programs that include more variation compar ed to prescribing constant
repetition ranges with a greater or fewer number of sets and training or not
training to failure (121, 195, 196). Moreover, it has been suggested that maximal
and rapid force production may be improved to a greater extent using a
combination of heavy and light training intensi ties compar ed to performing only
one loading method (68, 118, 189).
Strength and condi tioning professionals can add variation to a training
program at both the macro and micro level in several ways. At the macro level,
implementing a periodiz ed training plan may help develop specific fitness
characteristics (e.g., hypertr ophy, strength, and power) at different times
throughout the training year. This in turn may provide athletes with a variety of
training stimul i and potential ly enhance the adaptations in subsequent training
phases. Within each phase of training strength and condi tioning professionals
can make micro-level adjustments and add variation by modifying training
intensi ties and exercise selection, thereby reducing training monoton y and
offering unique tr aining stimul i.
As mentioned previously , the introduction of an overload stimulus is meant to
promote the development of a desired fitness characteristic. Howev er, the
removal or reduction of a training stimulus or the involution from monotonous
training and poor fatigue management may cause the opposi te to occur; this
deterior ation or loss of fitness characteristics refers to the principle of
reversibility . An example of the deterior ation of a fitness characteristic after
the removal of a training stimulus is the reduction in rapid force production that
may occur during a higher volume phase focused on improving muscle
hypertr ophy (98, 164). Howev er, the opposi te may also occur because a loss in
muscle size (i.e., muscle atrophy) may occur when training volume is reduced
during a taper (7, 188). As such, reversibility may be consider ed a product of
programming variation because different fitness characteristics are emphasiz ed
during various times throughout the training year. Regarding involution, a
plateau or decreased performance may result because of a lack of mechanical
variation (52) or appropriate loading (176). For examp le, maximal strength
adaptations may plateau if a similar training program with small progressions in
1191
loading is prescribed for longer than six weeks (186). Involution related to poor
fatigue manag ement may be the product of nonfunctional overreaching without
the inclusion of proper recovery, howev er (54, 55). While the loss of fitness
characteristics could be mitigated by incorpor ating retaining loads (i.e., small
percentage of overall training volume focused on maintaining a desired
characteristic) (42), it is important that strength and condi tioning professionals
understand the difference between retaining loads and the minimal effective
dose needed to maintain or dev elop a fi tness char acteristic.
The training goals and needs of each athlete are unique and should therefore
command a training program suited specifically for them; this training principle is
termed individualization . Athletes competing in different sports, the same
sport, or in different events come with different genetic characteristics and
training histories that affect how they respond to various training stimul i. As
such, strength and condi tioning professionals should always avoid a cookie
cutter approach to designing training programs and should instead focus on
providing individual ized training programs that help each athlete reach their
training goals. While this may seem simplistic, it is import ant to note that many
aspects of different training  programs may be similar or even identical. For
example, general strength characteristics for the lower body may be addressed
by prescribing one of many core exercises such as the back squat, leg press,
hex-bar deadl ift, and so on (figure 18.2); howe ver, a training program focused
on this fitness characteristic will likely have more than one lower body exercise,
and thus the likelihood of overlap between programs is high. Taking this into
consider ation, strength and condi tioning professionals may find that 80% to
90% of the exercises used in a training program are similar for multiple athletes,
while 10% to 20% of the exercises will be individual ized. It is important to note
that the loads programmed for these exercises are always individual ized to each
athlete’ s capabi lities.
1192
FIGURE 18.2 Exercise selection flow chart for lower body (a) strength and (b) power . Note:  The
displa yed ex ercises ar e examples and do not comprise an exhaustiv e list.
Designing a resistance training program is a complex process that requires
the recogni tion and manipulation of seven program design variables (referred
to in this chapter as steps 1  through 7).
This chapter discusses each variable in the context of three scenarios that
enable the strength and condi tioning professional to see how training principles
and pr ogram design guidel ines can be integr ated into an o verall program.
1. Needs analysis
2. Exercise selection
3. Training f requency
4. Exercise or der
5. Training load and r epetitions
6. Volume
7. Rest periods
Athlete Scenarios
The three scenarios include a basketball center (scenario A) in her in-season, an American footbal l offensive
lineman (scenario B) during his off-season, and a cross country runner (scenario C) during his preseason. It
is understood that in each scenario , the athlete is well condi tioned for his or her sport, has no
musculosk eletal dysfunction, and has been cleared for training and competi tion by the sports medicine
staff. The athletes in scenarios A (basketball center) and B (American footbal l lineman) have been
resistance training since high school, are accustomed to lifting heavy loads, and are skilled in machine and
free weight exercises. The high school cross country runner in scenario C, in contrast, began a resistance
training program in the preseason only four weeks ago, so his training is limited, and his exercise technique
skills are not wel l developed.
1193
Scenario A Scenario B Scenario C
Sex Female Sex Male Sex Male
Age 20 years old Age 28 years old Age 17 years old
Sport Collegiate bask etballSport Professional American
footbal lSport High school cr oss country
running
Position Center Position Offensive lineman Position (Not appl icable)
Season Beginning of the in-
seasonSeason Beginning of the of f-
seasonSeason Beginning of the
preseason
1194
Step 1: Needs Analysis
The strength and condi tionin g professional’ s initial task is to perform a needs
analysis , a two-stage process that includes an evaluation of the requirements
and char acteristics of the sport and an assessment of the athlete.
Evaluation of the Sport
The first task in a needs analysis is to determine the unique characteristics of
the sport, which includes the gener al physiological and biomechanical profile,
common injuries and mechan isms of injury , and position-speci fic attributes. This
information enables the strength and condi tioning professional to design a
program specific to those requirements and characteristics. Although this task
can be approached in several ways, it should at least include consider ation of
the following at tributes of the sport (50, 128):
Body and limb movement patterns and muscular involvement
(movement analysis )
Strength, power , hypertr ophy, and muscular endur ance priorities
(physiological analysis )
Common sites for joint and muscle injury and causativ e factors (injury
analysis ), especial ly for non-contact injuries
Other characteristics of a sport—such as cardiovascular endur ance, speed,
agility, and flexibi lity requirements—should also be evaluated. This chapter ,
howev er, focuses only on the physiological outcomes that specifically relate to
resistance training program design: strength, power , hypertr ophy, and muscular
endur ance.
For example, a movement analysis of the shot-put field event reveals that it is
an all-body movement that begins with the athlete in a semi-cr ouched stance,
with many joints flexed and adducted, and culminates in an upright stance with
many joints extended and abducted. The most heavily recruited muscles (not in
order) are the elbow extensors (triceps brachii), shoulder abductors (deltoids),
hip extensors (gluteals, hamstrings), knee extensors (quadriceps), and ankle
plantar flexors (soleus, gastrocnemius). Physiological ly, shot putting requires
high levels of strength and power for a successful performance. Also, enhanced
muscular hypertrophy may be advantageous since the muscle’ s potential to
produce force increases as its cross-sectional area becomes greater (81, 102).
The muscular endur ance requirement is minimal, howev er. Due to the repetitive
nature of training and competi tion, the muscles and tendons surrounding the
shoulder and elbow joints tend to be injur ed due to o veruse (192).
1195
Alternativ ely, increased hypertr ophy may be beneficial for force production, as
well as for collision and contact -based sports (e.g., American footbal l or rugby)
as a protectiv e mechanism against impacts, and to increase the athletes’
momentum (momentum = mass × velocity) to improve outcomes in collisions.
For example, if any reduction in speed is disproportionately lower than the
increase in muscle mass, the collision sport athlete will be able to gener ate
greater momentum, likely making him or her more difficult to stop or tackle. In
contrast, excessiv e hypertr ophy may negativ ely affect the performance of
endur ance-based athletes due to the requirement to carry extra mass for longer
durations (13). Despi te being in the same sport (i.e., athletics) as a shot-put
thrower, a distance athlete requires a substantial amount of cardiovascular and
muscle endur ance within his or her events while also being prone to different
overuse injuries (e.g. , stress fractures).
Moreover, the amount of hypertr ophy may be limited when considering
weight -categoriz ed sports such as weightl ifting, powerl ifting, and combat sports.
Depending on the athlete’ s body composi tion and body mass, there may only be
a limited potential for increases in lean body mass to ensur e he or she does not
exceed the weight category .
Assessment of the Athlete
The second task is to profile  the athlete’ s needs and goals by evaluating
training (and injury) status , conducting a variety of tests (e.g., maximum
strength testing), evaluating the results, and determining the primary goal of
training. The more individual ized the assessment process , the more specific the
resistance tr aining pr ogram for each athlete can be.
Training Status
An athlete’ s current condi tion or level of preparedness to begin a new or revised
program (training status) is an impor tant consider ation in the design of
training programs. This includes an evaluation by a sports medicine professional
of any current or previous injuries that may affect training. Also important is the
athlete’ s training background  or exercise history  (training that occurred
before he or she began a new or revised program), because this information will
help the strength and condi tioning professional better understand the athlete’ s
training capab ilities. Readers are referred to McKay and colleagues (108) for
classification of different levels of athlete performance. An assessment of the
athlete’ s training backgr ound should examine the
type of tr aining pr ogram (sprint, ply ometric, r esistance, and so on),
length of r ecent r egular participation in pr evious tr aining pr ograms,
level of intensi ty involved in pr evious tr aining pr ograms, and
1196
degree of exercise technique experi ence  (i.e., the knowledge and skill
to perf orm r esistance tr aining ex ercises pr operly).
Table 18.1 provides an example of how such information might be used to
classify athlete s’ training status as beginner , intermediate, or advanced. The
strength and condi tioning professional should realize that the three
classifications exist on a continuum and cannot be defini tively demar cated. For
example, in terms of resista nce training, many European soccer athletes will
have undertak en resistance training across their careers, but this is gener ally
emphasiz ed during preseason training with a relatively low frequency and low
training stress, which is further reduced (or completely omitted) in-season,
resulting in few of these athletes ever being classified as advanced in terms of
resistance tr aining status.
TABLE 18.1  Example of Classifying Resistance Training Status
Resistance training
statusResistance training background
Current
programTraining
ageFrequency
(per week)Training
stress*Technique
experience and
skill
Beginner (untr ained) Not tr aining or
just began
training<2
months≤1-2 None or
lowNone or minimal
Intermediate
(moder ately r esistance
trained)Currently
training2-6
months≤2-3 Medium Basic
Advanced (wel l
resistance tr ained)Currently
training≥1 year ≥3-4 High High
*In this example, “training stress” refers to the degree of physical demand or stimulus of the resistance
training pr ogram.
Physical Testing and Evaluation
Physical evaluation involves conducting assessments of the athlete’ s strength,
flexibi lity, powe r, speed, muscular endur ance, body comp osition, cardiovascular
endur ance, and so on. In this chapter , the needs analysis focuses on assessing
maximal muscular strength, but a compr ehensiv e assessment goes beyond that.
While 1RM testing provides valuable information about the maximal load an
athlete can lift during a specific exercise, which aids in programming specific
loads, it is important to evaluate other aspects of an athlete’ s force production
ability. On its own, 1RM testing does not provide insight into an athlete’ s
maximal or rapid force-gener ating capaci ty. As such, isometric strength
assessments, such as the isometric mid-thigh pull, can provide such insight,
1197
especial ly if combined with assessment of slow stretch-shortening cycle (SSC)
function (e.g., countermo vement jump) and fast SSC function (e.g., rebound
jump) using force plates. Readers are referred to chapters 13 and 14 for more
information on athlete testing.
In the soccer athlete exam ple provided in figure 18.3, we see that the
athlete’ s peak force and relative peak force during the isometric mid-thigh pull
are average for the performances across the league in which he or she
competes, highlighting a potential area for development. In contrast, the
athlete’ s count ermovement jump height (45 cm) is very good compar ed to the
rest of the league; howev er, their modified reactiv e strength index (0.46 [mRSI
= jump height / time to takeoff]) is only average, due to a prolonged time to
takeoff (1.0 s) (figure 18.4). This indicates that the athlete gener ated a sufficient
impulse (i.e., force × time) to achiev e the 45-centimeter jump height, using a
greater time for acceleration and therefore a suboptimal force profile. As such,
the athlete needs to emphasiz e strength development; as Cormie and colleagues
(26, 28, 29) previously demonstrated, strength training and the associated
increase in maximal strength  result in enhanced force production characteristics
during jumping , along with reductions in time to takeoff. Finally, the athlete’ s
rebound jump performance highlights a good ground contact time (163 ms) but
a low rebound  jump height (22 cm), resulting in an average reactiv e strength
index (1.40) compar ed to the performances across the league (figure 18.5). The
low jump height may be due to the inability to produce high enough forces
during the short ground contact time to provide a sufficient impulse for a higher
jump height. Overall, these characteristics highlight that the athlete needs to
enhance maximal and rapid force production. As such, initially emphasizing
maximal strength for a training block, followed by a subse quent block of training
emphasizing speed–str ength, ma y be adv antageous.
1198
FIGURE 18.3 Individual isomet ric mid-thigh pull metrics, presented as T-scores for the league in which
the athlete competes. R elative peak f orce (N/kg) is the athlete’ s peak f orce (N) divided b y body mass (kg).
FIGURE 18.4 Individual countermo vement jump performance metrics, presented as T-scores for the
league in which the athlete competes. mRSI = modified reactiv e strength index (mRSI = jump height /
TTT); TTT = time to tak eoff (s).
1199
FIGURE 18.5 Individual countermo vement rebound jump performance metrics, presented as T-scores for
the league  in which the athlete comp etes. RSI = reactiv e strength index (RSI = rebound jump height /
ground contact time).
To yield pertinent and reliable data that can be used effectively to develop a
resistance training program, the tests selected should be related to the athlete’ s
sport, consistent with the athlete’ s level of skill, and realistical ly based on the
equipment available. The result of the movement analysis discussed previously
provides direction in selecting  tests. Typical ly, major upper body exercises (e.g.,
bench press and shoulder press) and exercises that mimic jumping movements
to varying degrees (e.g., power clean, squat, front squat) are used in testing
batteries. Such assessments should not replace the assessment of jump
performance but instead should be used to determine whether any substandar d
jump perf ormances ar e due to poor str ength lev els.
After testing is completed, the results should be compar ed with normativ e or
descriptiv e data (if published data exist or at least to squad data in team sports)
to determine the athlete’ s strengths and weaknesses. Based on this evaluation
and the needs analysis of the sport, a training program can be developed to
improve deficiencies, maintain strengths, or further develop physiological
qualities that wi ll enable the athlete to bet ter meet the demands of the sport.
Primary Resistance Training Goal
The athlete’ s testing results, the movement and physiological analysis of the
sport, and the priorities of the athlete’ s sport season determine the primary goal
or outcome for the resistance  training program. Typical ly, this goal is to improve
1200
strength, powe r, hypertr ophy, or muscular endur ance. Despi te a potential desire
or need to make improvements in two different areas (e.g., strength and
muscular endur ance), an effort should be made to concentr ate on only one
training outco me per training block. This can be accompl ished using an
emphasis/de-emphasis approach wherein specific fitness characteristics are
targeted during different training periods while others are de-emphasiz ed (67).
An exam ple of how the strength and condi tioning professional may prioritize the
resistance training emphases  during the four main sport seasons is shown in
table 18.2. However, while focusing on the development of a specific physical
characteristic, it is important to provide sufficient stimul i for the maintenance of
other physical characteristics, especial ly if they are to be emphasiz ed in
subsequent blocks of training. A common strategy in many team sports is to
alternate between strength (i.e., strength–speed) and power (i.e., speed–
strength) development in-season, because the higher volumes associated with
strength endurance– and hypertr ophy-focused training can induce excessiv e
fatigue and potential ly result in an increased injury risk. Howev er, while this may
be easier to accompl ish with individual sports or events (e.g., track and field), a
team-based sport (e.g., basketball, soccer, hockey) that requires several fitness
characteristics for success may have to use a multitargeted approach within
training to develop those multiple characteristics simultaneously (177). Within
this approach, it has been suggested that compatible fitness characteristics (e.g.,
strength–power and speed) be trained simultaneously while avoiding
incompatible characteristics (e.g., speed and cardiovascular endur ance). An
emphasis/de-emphasis approach can still be used in these situations (see
chapter 22  for mor e information).
TABLE 18.2  Example of General Training Priorities by Sport
Season
Sport seasonPriority given to
Resistance training goal*Sport
practiceResistance
training
Off-season Low High Hypertr ophy and muscular endur ance (ini tially); str ength
and power (later)
Preseason Medium Medium Sport and mo vement speci fic (i.e. , strength, power , or
muscular endur ance, depending on the sport)
In-season High Low Maintenance of pr eseason tr aining goal; i f in-season is
long, these goals ma y alternate between di fferent
characteristics (e.g. , strength and power)
*The actual training goals and priorities are based on the specific sport or activity and may differ from the
goals l isted her e.
1201
Postseason
(activ e rest)Variable Variable Not speci fic (ma y include activi ties other than sport ski ll or
resistance tr aining)
*The actual training goals and priorities are based on the specific sport or activity and may differ from the
goals l isted her e.
1202
Step 2: Exercise Selection
Exercise selection  involves choosing exercises for a resistance training
program. To make informed exercise selections, the strength and condi tioning
professional must understand the nature of various types of resistance training
exercises, the movement and muscular requirements of the sport, the athlete’ s
exercise techn ique experien ce, the equipment available, and the amount of
training time available. Figure 18.2 on page 528 displays exercise selection flow
charts f or lower body str ength and power ex ercises.
Exercise Type
Although there are hundr eds of resistance training exercises to select from when
one is designin g a program, most involve primary muscle groups or body areas
and fall into categories based on their r elative importance to the athlete’ s sport.
Core and Assistance Exercises
Exercises can be classified as either core or assistance based on the size of the
muscle areas involved and their level of contribution to a particular sport
movement. Core exercises  recruit one or more large muscle areas (i.e., chest,
shoulder , back, hip, or thigh), involve two or more primary joints (multijoint
exercises ; e.g., split squat, bench press, bent-over row), and receive priority
when one is selecting exercises because of their direct application to the sport
and enhanced dynamic correspondence (i.e., transference of gym-based training
to improved performance in athletic tasks). Assistance exercises  usually
recruit smaller muscle areas (i.e., upper arm, abdominal muscles, calf, neck,
forearm, lower back, or anterior lower leg), involve only one primary joint
(single-joint exercises ; e.g., knee extension and flexion, biceps curls), and
are considered less important  for improving sport performance. Gener ally, all the
joints at the shoulder —the glenohumer al and shoulder girdle articulations— are
consider ed one primary  joint when resistance training exercises are categoriz ed
as core or assistance. The spine is similarly consider ed a single primary joint
(e.g., abdominal crunch and back extension ex ercises).
Application of the Needs Analysis
Refer to the first scenario table on page 528  for a description of the scenario athletes.
Scenario A Scenario BScenario C
The information in this table reflects one approach to evaluating the requirements of a sport and profiling
an athlete.
1203
Female collegiate basketball
player
In-seasonMale professional American
football lineman
Off-seasonMale high school cross country
runner
Preseason
SPORT EVALUATION
Movement analysis
Sport:  Running and jumping, bal l
handl ing, shooting, blocking, and
rebounding
Muscular in volvement:  All major
muscle ar eas, especial ly the hips,
thighs, and shoulders
Physiological analysis (primary
requirement)
Strength/powerSPORT EVALUATION
Movement analysis
Sport:  Grabbing, pushing,
repelling, and deflecting
opponents
Muscular in volvement:  All
major muscle ar eas, especial ly
the hips, thighs, chest, arms,
and low back
Physiological analysis
(primary requirement)
Hypertr ophySPORT EVALUATION
Movement analysis
Sport:  Running, r epetitive leg and
arm mo vements
Muscular in volvement:  All lower
body muscle ar eas, postur al
muscles, shoulders, and arms
Physiological analysis (primary
requirement)
Muscular endur ance
ATHLETE’S PROFILE
Training background
Has resistance tr ained r egularly
since high school
Possesses ex cellent ski ll in
performing f ree weight and
machine ex ercises
Just completed a 3 ×/week
resistance tr aining pr ogram in
the pr eseason consisting of f ull-
body work outs that included
lower and upper body ex ercises
during each session (4 cor e, 3
sets of 3 r eps using loads
ranging f rom 4RM-6RM)ATHLETE’S PROFILE
Training background
Has resistance tr ained
regularly thr oughout high
school, col lege, and his
professional car eer
Possesses ex cellent ski ll in
performing f ree weight and
machine ex ercises
Just completed a 2 ×/week
resistance tr aining pr ogram
in the postseasonb consisting
of 8 ex ercises (3 cor e, 5
assistance; 4 lower body , 4
upper body , 2-3 sets of
12RM-15RM loads)ATHLETE’S PROFILE
Training background
Just began r esistance tr aining in
preseason
Has only l imited ski ll in
performing f ree weight and
machine ex ercises
Just completed a 3 ×/week
resistance tr aining pr ogram in
the of f-seasonc consisting of f ull-
body work outs that included
lower and upper body ex ercises
during each session (2-3 sets of
6-8 reps using loads r anging
from 8RM-10RM)
CLASSIFICATION OF
RESISTANCE TRAINING
STATUS
AdvancedCLASSIFICATION OF
RESISTANCE TRAINING
STATUS
AdvancedCLASSIFICATION OF
RESISTANCE TRAINING
STATUS
Beginner
PRIMARY IN-SEASON
RESISTANCE TRAINING GOAL
Strength/poweraPRIMARY OFF-SEASON
RESISTANCE TRAINING
GOAL
Hypertr ophyPRIMARY PRESEASON
RESISTANCE TRAINING GOAL
Muscular endur ance
The information in this table reflects one approach to evaluating the requirements of a sport and profiling
an athlete.
1204
COMMENTS
aThe in-season wi ll addr ess both of
these goals thr ough a combination
of appr opriate ex ercise selection
and v olume–load assignments.COMMENTS
bDue to the extr eme ph ysical
demands of American f ootbal l,
this athlete’ s postseason
training v olume w as greater
than is often assigned f or the
active rest phase of a t ypical
program.COMMENTS
cBecause this athlete just began
his resistance tr aining pr ogram, his
frequency w as limited to 3 ×/week
in the of f-season r ather than the
4×/week that ar e typical ly
completed b y better-trained
individuals.
The information in this table reflects one approach to evaluating the requirements of a sport and profiling
an athlete.
A common application of assistance exercises is for injury prevention and
rehabi litation, because these exercises often isolate a specific muscle or muscle
group. The muscles that are predisposed to injury from the unique demands of a
sport skill (e.g., the shoulder external rotators for overhand pitching) or those
that require recondi tioning after an injury (e.g., a quadric eps contusion) can be
specifically conditioned by an assistance exercise. Howev er, it is important that
the chosen exercises improve a physical characteristic within the program
(flexibi lity, strength, etc.) and that the professional prescribes them appropriately
with speci fic volumes and intensi ties.
Structural and Power Exercises
A core exercise that emphas izes loading the spine directly (e.g., back squat) or
indirectly (e.g., power clean) can be further described as a structural
exercise . More specifically, a structur al exercise involves muscular stabilization
of postu re during performanc e of the lifting movement (e.g., maintaining a rigid
torso and a neutral spine during the back squat). Practitioners should be mindf ul
that during traditional structur al exercises (e.g., squat and bench press), a
substantial portion of the range of motion results in deceleration (47, 93, 119).
As such, ballistic tasks that emphasiz e movement velocity (e.g., loaded jumps)
should be programmed to emphasiz e power development. A structur al exercise
that is performed very quickly or explosiv ely is consider ed a power exercise .
Typical ly, power exercises are assigned to athletes when they are appropriate for
the athlete’ s sport-speci fic training priorities. It should be noted, howev er, that in
weak athletes , or those with a low training age, emphasizing strength
development has been shown to enhance power output to an equal or greater
extent than ballistic training (26, 28, 29). Semi-bal listic exercises, such as
weightl ifting exercises and their derivatives, can also be used effectively for the
development of power because they provide the potential to emphasiz e a
velocity- or force-dominant stimulus (figure 18.6) (21, 170-173). Such a diverse
range of exercises also permi ts substantial variation and the opportuni ty to
1205
select exercises to accommodate technique, mobility, and injury -related
consider ation.
FIGURE 18.6 Recommended loading ranges to emphasiz e speed–str ength, strength–speed, or gener al
power development using weightl ifting exercises and their derivatives. Red shading illustrates the primary
loading emphasis for the exercises, whereas blue shading illustrates loading, which is likely to be less
effective at enhancing the specific strength characteristic. Loads are based on the 1RM for the power clean,
power snatch, or the o verhead deriv ative, as appr opriate.
Adapted by permission from P. Comfort, G.G. Haff, T.J. Suchomel, et al., “National Strength and Conditioning Association Position
Statement on Weightlifting for Sports Performance,” Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research 37, no. 6 (2023): 1168.
Movement Analysis of the Sport
In the needs analysis (step 1), the strength and condi tioning professional has
identi fied the unique requirements and characteristics of the sport. The exercises
selected for a resistanc e training program that focus on condi tioning for a
particular sport need to be relevant to the activities of that sport in their body
and limb movement patterns, joint ranges of motion, and muscles involved and
muscle actions. The exercises should also create muscular  balance to reduce risk
of injury from disproportionate training. For example, the hamstrings serve as
knee flexors and hip exten sors, while the quadriceps  are knee extensors.
Resear chers have shown that the muscle activation of the hamstrings and
1206
quadriceps may vary based on the exercises that are chosen (101, 153, 190).
Thus, it is up to the strength  and condi tioning profession al to understand how
each exercise may affect muscular development and to prescribe exercises
accordingly based on the needs of his or her athletes.
Sport-Specific Exercises
The more similar the training activity is to the actual sport movement, the
greater the likelihood that there will be a positive transfer to that sport (i.e.,
dynamic correspondence) (160, 165). This is the specificity concept, sometimes
confused with the SAID principle. Arguably the SAID principle is more important
than movement specificity; strength and condi tioning professionals need to be
mindf ul of the specific physiological adaptations that are targeted during each
phase of training. Table 18.3 provides examples of resistance training exercises
that relate in varying degrees to the movement patterns of various sports. The
strength and condi tioning professional should find this table helpful when trying
to identi fy sport-speci fic exercises to ensur e dynamic correspondence. For
example, the primary muscles involved in jumping for basketball are the hip and
knee extensors. An athlete can train these muscles by performing the leg press
or back squat, but which exercise is preferable? Certainly , both exercises
strengthen the hip and knee extensors, but because jumping is performed from
an erect body position with balance and weight -bearing forces as consider ations,
the back squat is more relevant to jumping and is therefore preferred over the
leg press (12, 84). Additional ly, full hip extension is achiev ed during a squat and
a jump, but this is not the case for all leg press machines. The weightl ifting
movements and their derivatives are relevant to jumping because of their quick
movement characteristics, thereby applying a high rate of force development
and power output (16, 87).
TABLE 18.3  Examples of Movement-Related Resistance
Training Exercises
Movement pattern Related exercises
Ball dribbl ing and passing Closed-grip bench pr ess, dumbbel l bench pr ess, triceps pushdown, r everse
curl, hammer curl
Ball kicking Unilateral hip adduction and abduction, single-leg squat, f orward step
lunge, leg (knee) extension, leg r aise
Freestyle swimming
(including start and turns)Pull-up, later al shoulder r aise, f orward step lunge, upright r ow, barbel l
pullover, single-leg squat
Vertical jumping (bal listic,
slow S SC)Snatch, power clean, push jerk, back squat, f ront squat, loaded squat jump ,
jump shrug, push pr ess, push jerk
1207
Vertical jumping (ply ometric,
fast SSC)Drop jump , rebound jump , standing cal f raise, seated cal f raise
Racket stroke Flat dumbbel l fly, lunge, bent -over later al raise, wrist curl, wrist extension
Rowing Power clean, clean pul l, snatch pul l, hang high pul l, bent -over row, seated
row, back squat, leg pr ess, deadl ift, stiff-leg deadl ift, good morning
Running, sprinting Snatch, clean, power clean, back squat, f ront squat, f orward step lunge,
step-up , leg (knee) extension, leg (knee) curl, toe r aise (dorsi flexion)
Throwing, pi tching Lunge, single-leg squat, barbel l pullover, overhead triceps extension,
shoulder internal and external r otation
Muscle Balance
Exercises selected for the specific demands of the sport should maintain a
balance of muscular strength  across joints and between opposing muscle groups
(e.g., biceps brachii and triceps brachii). Avoid designing  a resistance training
program that increases the risk of injury due to a dispari ty between the strength
of the agonist , the muscle or muscle group actively causing the movement
(e.g., the quadriceps in the leg [knee] extension exercise), and the antagonist ,
the sometimes  passiv e (i.e., not concentrical ly involved) muscle or muscle group
located on the opposi te side of the limb (e.g., the hamst rings in the leg [knee]
extension exercise). If an imbalance is created or discovered, exercises to
restore an appropriate strength balance need to be selected. For example, if
isokinetic testing reveals that the hamstrings are extremely weak compar ed with
the quadriceps, additional hamstring exercises could be included to compensate
for the imbalance (48). Isokinetic adaptations may be specific to the muscle
actions involved as well as the speeds used during the training protocols (31,
129) and do not transfer effectively to enhanced performance in athletic tasks
(94, 122). Note that muscle balance  does not always mean equal strength,
just a proper ratio of strength, power , or muscular endur ance of one muscle or
muscle gr oup relative to another muscle or muscle gr oup.
Exercise Technique Experience
An important part of the needs analysis described earlier is evaluating the
athlete’ s training status and exercise technique. If there is any question whether
an athlete can perform an exercise with proper techniq ue, the strength and
condi tioning professional should ask the athlete to demonstr ate the exercise. If
the athlete uses incorr ect technique, the strength and condi tioning professional
should provide complete instruction. Often, unskilled individuals are introduced
to machines and free weight assistance exercises because these are consider ed
easier to perform than free weight core exercises due to their lower balance and
coordination requirements (146, 147). Despi te this, one should not assume that
1208
the athlete will perform exercises correctly, even those that are relatively easy to
perform. Thus, a strength and condi tioning professional should provide
appropriate exercise progressions and regressions that are based on each
athlete’ s techn ique and their ability to maintain their technique with heavier
loads. An example of squat progression and regression exercises is displa yed in
figure 18.7.
FIGURE 18.7 Squat progression and regression exercise examples.  Note:  Individual exercises may also
be progressed or regressed using different loads. In addition, advanced athletes may progress the front
squat and back squat using variable resistance training with chains or bands as well as accentuated
eccentric loading.
Availability of Resistance Training Equipment
The availability of training equipment must be consider ed in the selection of
exercises. A lack of certain equipment may necessi tate selecting exercises that
are not as sport specific. For example, the absence of Olympic -type barbel ls with
revolving sleeves would preclude exercises such as the power clean, and an
insufficient supply of barbel l plates may result in substi tuting exercises that do
not require as much resistan ce; for example, the back squat could be replaced
by the f ront squat.
Available Training Time Per Session
The strength and condi tionin g professional should weigh  the value of certain
exercises again st the time it takes to perform them. Some exercises take longer
to complete than others. If time for a training session is limited, exercises that
are more time efficient may need to be given priority over others. For example,
the machine leg press could be selected instead of the free weight lunge to train
the hips and thighs of a 100-meter sprinter . The time required to move the
machine pin to the correct slot in a weight stack and perform 5 repetitions of a
machine leg press is much less than the time required for the lunge exercise, for
which the athlete must load both ends of a bar, attach the locks, back out of the
power rack, establ ish a stable starting position, perform 5 repetitions of each
leg, and rerack the bar. Although the machine leg press is less sport specific, the
1209
time saved may permi t including other exercises or performing more sets. The
benefi t of including the more specific lunge exercise, on the other hand, may be
worth the additional time needed, although this depend s on the goals of the
training session and time a vailable.
Application of the Exercise Selection Guidelines
Refer to the first scenario table on page 528  for a description of the scenario athletes. Ex ercises ar e not
listed in or der of ex ecution.
Scenario A
Female collegiate
basketball player
In-seasonScenario B
Male professional American
football lineman
Off-seasonScenario C
Male high school cross country runner
Preseason
CORE
Push jerk (total body ,
power)a
Hang power clean (total
body, power)a
Jump shrug (total body ,
power)a
Front squat (hip and
thigh)
Romanian deadl ift
(posterior hip and thigh)
Incline bench pr ess
(chest)
Seated r ow (upper back)
Pull-up (back, shoulders,
arms)COREb
Power clean (total body , power)
Tire flipping (total body , power)
Back squat (hip and thigh)
Deadl ift (hip and thigh)
Bench pr ess (chest)
Shoulder pr ess (shoulders)CORE
Hexagonal barbel l deadl ift (hip and thigh)
Lunge (hip and thigh)c
Rear leg–elev ated spl it-squat (hip and
thigh)
Single-leg sti ff-legged deadl ift (posterior
hip and thigh)
Vertical chest pr ess (chest)d
ASSISTANCE
Abdominal crunch
(abdomen)
Single-leg sti ff-legged
deadl ift (posterior hip and
thigh)
Standing cal f raise
(posterior lower leg)ASSISTANCE
Towel-grip pul l-up (f orearm grip)
Abdominal crunch (abdomen)
Step-up (hip and thigh)
Leg (knee) curl (posterior thigh)
Bent-over row (upper back)
Shoulder shrug (upper back and
neck)
Barbell biceps curl (anterior
upper arm)
Lying triceps extension (posterior
upper arm)
Seated cal f (heel) r aise (posterior
lower leg)ASSISTANCE
Abdominal crunch (abdomen)
Leg (knee) curl (posterior thigh)
Lateral shoulder r aise (shoulders)
One-arm dumbbel l row (upper back)e
Toe raise (dorsi flexion) (anterior lower
leg)
Machine back extension (lower back)
Cable hip flexion (hip flex ors)
COMMENTS COMMENTS COMMENTS
1210
aThese ex ercises ar e
included to maximiz e
power and match the
jumping mo vements of
basketball.This athlete has extr a time
available to perf orm mor e
resistance tr aining ex ercises
because sport ski ll practice is not
the first priori ty in the of f-season.
bGreater tr aining f requency
allows mor e core exercises to be
included (see step 3).cAlthough not alw ays consider ed a cor e
exercise, the lunge r ecruits muscles and
joints that ha ve direct appl ication to
running.
dThis ex ercise also in volves the triceps
brachii muscle, so an assistance ex ercise
to isolate the triceps is not needed. This
reduces the time dev oted to the
resistance tr aining portion of the
preseason pr ogram.
eThis ex ercise also in volves the biceps
brachii muscle, so an assistance ex ercise
to isolate the biceps is not needed. This
reduces the time dev oted to the
resistance tr aining portion of the
preseason pr ogram.
1211
Step 3: Training Frequency
Training frequency  refers to the number of training sessions completed in a
given time period. For a resistance training program, a common time period is
one week. When determining  training frequency , the strength and condi tioning
professional should consider the athlete’ s training status, sport season, projected
exercise loads, types of exercises, and other concurr ent training or activities.
When the weekly resistance training volume–load is equated, hypertr ophic
adaptations (142) and strength adaptations (34) are comparable irrespectiv e of
training f requency .
Training Status
The athlete’ s level of preparedness for training, which was determined during
the needs analysis (step 1), is an influential factor in determining training
frequency because it affects the number of rest days needed between training
sessions. Traditional ly, three workouts per week are recommended for many
athletes, because the interv ening days allow sufficient recovery between
sessions. As an athlete adapts to training and becomes better condi tioned, it is
appropriate to consider increasing the number of training days to four and, with
additional training, maybe five, six, or seven (table 18.4), although this depends
on the phase of the competi tive cycle. The gener al guideline is to schedule
training session s to include at least one rest or recovery day—but not more than
three—between sessions that stress the same muscle groups (77); howev er, this
may also depend on the intensi ty of the prescribed exercises. For example, if a
strength and condi tioning professional wants a novice athlete to perform a total
body resistanc e training program two times per week, the sessions should be
spaced out evenly (e.g., Monday and Thursda y or Tuesda y and Friday). If the
athlete trains only on Monday and Wednesda y, the absence of a training
stimulus between Wednesda y and the following Monda y may result in a
decrease in the athlete’ s training status (41, 61, 77), although, for a short time
in well-trained  athletes, one session per week can maintain strength if
appropriate loading strategie s are implemented (41, 61). Examples of training
frequencies of 3 and 4 times  per week using a total body push–pul l format are
presented in table 18.5 .
TABLE 18.4  Resistance Training Frequency Based on Training
Status
1212
Training status Frequency guidelines (sessions per week)
Beginner 2-3
Intermediate 3-4
Advanced* 4-7
*May include mul tiple sessions per da y.
Data f rom Gr aves et al. (1988); Häkkinen et al. (1988); Hof fman et al. (1990).
TABLE 18.5  Examples of Common Total-Body Routines Using
a Push–Pull Emphasis
Training
organizationBody parts or
muscle groups
trainedSample training week Resulting
training
frequency Sun Mon Tues Wed Thurs Fri Sat
Push–pul l Total body RestHeavy
pushRest Heavy
pullRest Light
mixRest 3 times per
week
Push–pul l Total body RestHeavy
pushRest Heavy
pullLight
pushRest Light
pull4 times per
week
More highly resistance-tr ained (intermediate or advanced) athletes can
augment their training by using a split routine  in which different muscle
groups are trained on different days. Training nearly every day may seem to
violate the recommended guidel ines for recovery, but grouping exercises that
train a portion of the body (e.g., lower body or upper body) or certain muscle
areas (e.g., chest, shoulder , and triceps) gives the trained athlete an opportuni ty
to adequately recover between similar training sessions (table 18.6). For
instance, a common lower body–upper body regimen includes four training
sessions per week: lower body on Monda y and Thursda y and upper body on
Tuesda y and Friday (or vice versa). This way, there are two or three days of rest
between each lower or upper body training session, even though the athlete
trains on two consecutiv e days twice a week (80). For split routines with three
distinct training days, the rest days are not on the same day each week. It
should be noted that there are no differences in muscle hypertr ophy or strength
adaptations between split and total body routines when training volume is
equated (131).  Howev er, since volumes may not always be matched in training,
it is possible that a split routine may allow athletes to accumulate a greater
volume–load per muscle group, potential ly benefi ting hypertr ophy and gener al
strength characteristics. Given that athletes may have limited time to train, and
the fact that sports do not isolate specific muscle groups, strength and
condi tioning professionals must determine whether a split routine is appropriate
for their athletes and when and how it could be implemented. For example, an
1213
off-season training program may be an appropriate time to implement a split
routine because this is typical ly the time when athletes may focus on developing
muscle hypertrophy, which has been associated with higher training volumes
(143). In contrast, preseaso n and in-season phases of training may not be
appropriate for split routines given the emphasis on developing maximal and
rapid force production characteristics, reducing training volume and fatigue, and
improving sport -speci fic technical ski lls.
TABLE 18.6  Examples of Common Split Routines
Training
dayBody
parts or
muscle
groups
trainedSample training week
Resulting
training
frequency Sun Mon Tues Wed Thurs Fri Sat
1 Lower
bodyRest Lower
bodyUpper
bodyRest Lower
bodyUpper
bodyRest 4 times
per week
2 Upper
body
1 Chest,
shoulders,
tricepsRest Chest,
shoulders,
tricepsLower
bodyBack,
trapezius,
bicepsRest Chest,
shoulders,
tricepsLower
body5 times
per week*
2 Lower
body
3 Back,
trapezius,
biceps
1 Chest and
backChest
and
backLower
bodyShoulders
and armsRest Chest
and
backLower
bodyShoulders
and arms6 times
per week*
2 Lower
body
3 Shoulders
and arms
*Frequency varies between five times per week and six times per week, depending on the day of the week
that is the first tr aining da y.
Sport Season
Another factor that influence s resistance training frequency is the sport season.
For example, the increased emphasis on practicing the sport skill during the in-
season necess itates a decrease in the time spent in the weight room and,
consequently , reduces the frequency of resistance training (tables 18.4 and
18.7). The problem  is that there simply is not enough time to fit all the desired
1214
modes of training into each day. So even though a well-trained athlete may be
capable of completing four or more resistance training sessions per week, the
other time demands of the sport (i.e., competi tion schedule, technical and
tactical training) may not permi t this. When time is constr ained, the subdivision
of weekly training volume across multiple short-duration bouts, termed
microdosing , has been suggested as a potential ly useful strategy , which may
mitigate the fatigue associa ted with longer duration, higher volume training
sessions (34 , 35).
TABLE 18.7  Resistance Training Frequency Based on the
Sport Season (for a Trained Athlete)
Sport season Frequency guidelines (sessions per week)
Off-season 4-6
Preseason 3-4
In-season 1-3
Postseason (activ e rest) 0-3
Data f rom Stone and O’B ryant (1987); T esch (1992).
Training Load and Exercise Type
The ability to train more frequently may be enhanced by alternating heavier and
lighter training days (42, 166, 177). As shown in table 18.5, heavy and light
training days may be organized based on the type of exercises that are being
performed regardless of whether the same muscle groups are being used. While
training to failure may length en the necessary recovery time between sessions
(59, 117), athletes may not require longer recovery times despite training with
heavier loads if the volume remains low for the selected exercises (5). Howev er,
strength and condi tioning professionals should be aware that higher volume
loads can lengthen the necessary recovery time between training sessions (124).
There is also evidence that upper body muscles can recover more quickly from
heavy loading sessions compar ed to lower body muscles (76). The same is true
regarding an athlete’ s ability to recover faster from single-joint exercises
compar ed to multijoint exercises (158). These resear ch findings may explain
why, for example, powerl ifters may schedule only one very heavy deadl ift or
squat tr aining session per week.
More importantly , in a recent meta- analysis, Swinton and colleagues (182)
concluded that the most important factor for appropriate adaptations is the
intensi ty used,  with heavy loads (≥80% 1RM) resulting in the greatest increases
in strength and with low to moder ate loads (≤30% 1RM) during ballistic tasks
1215
stimulating the greatest increases in vertical jump performance and moder ate
loads (40%-70% 1RM) being the most appropriate for power development.
Howev er, as mentioned previously , an emphasis on strength development in
weaker individuals may result in the greatest improvements in performance (8,
26, 29, 30, 178). This is likely due to the fact that relative force production
determines acceleration, with the duration over which  the force is applied
determining ac celeration, based on the impulse–momentum theor em.
Other Training
Exercise frequency is also influenced by the overall amount of physical stress, so
the strength and condi tioning  professional must consider the effects of all forms
of exercise. If the athlete’ s program already includes aerobic endur ance (e.g.,
long, slow distance) or speed, agility, and power (e.g., sprinting, agility, speed –
endur ance, plyometric) training, sport skill practice, or any combination of these
components, the frequency of resistance training may need to be reduced (32).
Additional ly, the effects of a physical ly demanding occupation may be relevant.
Athletes who work in manual labor jobs, instruct or assist others in physical
activities, or are on their feet all day may not be able to withstand the same
training frequency as athletes who are less active outside  of their sport-related
pursui ts.
1216
Step 4: Exercise Order
Exercise order  refers to a sequence of resistance exercises performed during
one training session. Although there are many ways to arrange exercises,
decisions are invariably based  on how one exercise affects the quality of effort or
the technique of another exercise. Usual ly, exercises are arranged so that an
athlete’ s maximal force capabilities are available (from a sufficient rest or
recovery period) to complete a set with proper exercise technique. Four of the
most common methods of ordering resistance exercises are described in the
following par agraphs.
Application of the Training Frequency Guidelines
Refer to the first scenario table on page 528  for a description of the scenario athletes.
Scenario A
Female collegiate basketball
player
In-seasonScenario B
Male professional American
football lineman
Off-seasonScenario C
Male high school cross
country runner
Preseason
ADVANCED TRAINING STATUS
ALLOWS
4-7×/weekADVANCED TRAINING STATUS
ALLOWS
4-7×/weekBEGINNER TRAINING
STATUS ALLOWS
2-3×/week
FREQUENCY GUIDELINE
BASED ON THE SPORT SEASON
1-3×/weekFREQUENCY GUIDELINE
BASED ON THE SPORT
SEASON
4-6×/weekFREQUENCY GUIDELINE
BASED ON THE SPORT
SEASON
3-4×/week
ASSIGNED RESISTANCE
TRAINING FREQUENCY
3×/weeka
Total body work outs perf ormed on
Monda y, Wednesda y, and Frida y
while incorpor ating a push, pul l,
and mix emphasisASSIGNED RESISTANCE
TRAINING FREQUENCY
4×/week (spl it routineb)
Monda y and Thursda y (lower body
exercises)
Tuesda y and Frida y (upper body
exercises)ASSIGNED RESISTANCE
TRAINING FREQUENCY
2×/weekc
Total body work outs perf ormed
on Wednesda y and Satur day
while incorpor ating a hea vy and
light emphasis
COMMENTS
aTraining f requency is maintained
from the pr evious season
(preseason) to al low for the
maintenance and impr ovement of
strength–power char acteristics
during the in-season phase of
training.COMMENTS
bA split routine al lows f or mor e
overall exercises to be perf ormed
without an ex cessiv e incr ease in
training time (per session)
because the ex ercises ar e divided
over mor e training da ys.COMMENTS
cDespi te the sport season, the
assigned tr aining f requency is
based on the athlete’ s training
status and the addi tional need
to dev elop car diovascular
endur ance.
1217
Power, Other Core, Then Assistance Exercises
Power exercises such as weightlifting movements and their derivatives (e.g.,
snatch, hang power clean, jump shrug) and other ballistic exercises (e.g., jump
squat or hexagonal barbel l jump) should be performed first in a training session,
followed by other non-power  core exercises, and then assistance exercises. This
is due to the large neuromuscular demand placed on the body by power
exercises because they require greater levels of skill and are prone to fatigue
(71). The literature also refers to this arrangement as multijoint exercises and
then single-join t exercises or large muscle areas and then small muscle areas
(151, 183). Athletes who become fatigued are prone to using poor technique
and consequently are at higher risk of injury . The explosiv e movements and
extensiv e muscular involvement of power exercises also result in substantial
energy expend iture (138). This is another reason to have athletes perform such
exercises first, while they are still metabol ically fresh. If power exercises are not
selected in step 2 (exercise selection), the recommended  order of exercises is
core exercises (ideal ly with the most demanding exercises first) and then
assistance exercises. This is an important consider ation because resear chers
have shown that greater maximal strength adaptations may be produced with
the exercises programmed earlier in a training session (44, 152) while the latter
exercises may be negativ ely affected due to the accumulated fatigue (116, 150,
152).
Lower and Upper Body Exercises (Alternated)
One method of providing the opportuni ty for athletes to recover more fully
between exercises is to alternate lower body exercises with upper body
exercises. This arrangement is especial ly helpful for untrained individuals who
find that comp leting several lower or upper body exercises in succession is too
strenuous (50). Also, if training time is limited, this method of arranging
exercises minimiz es the length of the rest periods required between exercises
and maximizes the rest between body areas. The result is a decrease in overall
training time because the athlete can perform a lower body exercise and then
immediately go to an upper body exercise without having to wait for the lower
body to rest. Howev er, when choosing an order between lower and upper body
exercises, strength and condi tioning professionals should consider prescribing
lower body exercises first since these movements typical ly involve more muscle
mass and may place a greater overall stress on the body due to the absolute
loads that will be used. If the exercises are performed with minimal rest periods
(20-30 s), this method is also referred to as circuit training  (gener ally not
optimal for the development of maximal strength)— a method sometimes also
1218
used to improve cardiovascular endur ance (58, 130), although to a lesser extent
than con ventional aer obic ex ercise tr aining.
“Push” and “Pull” Exercises (Alternated)
Another metho d of improving efficiency of training when time is limited is to
alternate pushing exercises (e.g., bench press, shoulder press, triceps extension)
with pulling exercises (e.g., lat pulldown, bent-over row, biceps curl) (2). This
push–pul l arrangement ensur es that the same muscle group will not be used in
two exercises (or sets, in some cases) in succession, thus reducing fatigue in the
involved muscl es. This approach is similar to the programming of antagonistic
supersets, described later. In contrast, arranging several pulling exercises (e.g.,
pull-up, seated row, hammer curl) one after the other, even with a rest period
between each, will compr omise the number of repetitions performed because
the biceps brachii muscle (involved in all three exercises) will become less
responsiv e due to fatigue. The same result would occur if several pushing
exercises (e.g., incline bench press, shoulder press, triceps pushdown) were
sequential ly arranged (all three engage the triceps brachii) (150). There are also
push–pul l arrangements for the lower body—for example, back squat and front
squat as “push ” and stiff-legged deadl ift and leg (knee) curl as “pull”—but the
classification of some exercises as “push” or “pull” is not as clear (e.g., leg
[knee] extension). Howev er, in such examples strength and condi tioning
professionals need to be mindf ul when selecting such exercises to ensur e that
key stabilizing muscles (e.g., erector spinae) are not excessiv ely fatigued in both
exercises. Alternating push and pull exercises is also used in circuit training
programs and is an ideal arrangement for novice athletes or those returning to a
resistance tr aining pr ogram (3).
Supersets and Compound Sets
Other methods  of arranging exercises involve having athletes perform one set of
a pair of exercises with little to no rest between them. Two common examples
are supersets and compound sets. A superset  involves two sequential ly
performed exercises that stress two opposing muscles or muscle areas (i.e., an
agonist and its antagonist) (2), similar to the push–pul l approach. For example,
an athlete performs 10 repetitions of the barbel l biceps curl exercise, sets the
barbel l down, then goes over to the triceps pushdown station and performs 10
repetitions. A compound set involves sequential ly performing two different
exercises for the same muscle group (2). For instance, an athlete completes a
set of the barbell biceps curl exercise, then switches to dumbbel ls and
immediately performs a set of the hammer curl exercise. In this case, the stress
on the same muscle is compounded because both exercises recruit the same
1219
muscle area. Both methods of arranging and performing pairs of exercises are
time efficient and purposely  more demanding— and consequently may not be
appropriate for uncondi tioned athletes. Note, howev er, that sometimes the
meanings of superset  and compound set  are inter changed.
Application of the Exercise Order Guidelines
Refer to the first scenario table on page 528  for a description of the scenario athletes.
Scenario A
Female collegiate
basketball player
In-seasonScenario B
Male professional American
football lineman
Off-seasonScenario C
Male high school cross country runner
Preseason
ASSIGNED EXERCISE
ORDER STRATEGIES
Power, other cor e, then
assistance ex ercises
“Push” and “pul l” exercises
(alternated)ASSIGNED EXERCISE
ORDER STRATEGIES
Core and then assistance
exercises
“Push” and “pul l” exercises
(alternated)ASSIGNED EXERCISE ORDER
STRATEGIES
Core and then assistance ex ercises
Lower and upper body ex ercises
(alternated)
MONDAY
Push jerk
Front squata
Incline bench pr essb
Triceps pushdown
WEDNESDAY
Hang power clean
Romanian deadl ifta
Seated r owb
Dumbbel l alternating curl
FRIDAY
Jump shrug
Rear leg–elev ated spl it-
squata
Pull-upb
Single-leg sti ff-legged
deadl iftLOWER BODY (MONDAY
AND THURSDAY)
Deadl iftc
Back squatc
Step-upc
Leg (knee) curl
Seated cal f (heel) r aise
UPPER BODY (TUESDAY
AND FRIDAY)
Bench pr ess
Bent-over row
Shoulder pr ess
Barbell biceps curld
Shoulder shrug
Lying triceps extension
Abdominal crunchWEDNESDAY
Hexagonal barbel l deadl ift
Vertical chest pr ess
One-arm dumbbel l row
Abdominal crunch
Machine back extensione
SATURDAY
Lunge
Lateral shoulder r aise
Single-leg sti ff-legged deadl ift
Toe raise (dorsi flexion)
Abdominal crunch
Machine back extensione
COMMENTS
a,bThese ex ercises ar e
alternated to pr ovide r elative
rest between their simi lar
movement pat terns whi le still
following the “power , other
core, then assistance”
exercise or der str ategy .COMMENTS
cThese ex ercises do not f ollow
the “push” and “pul l”
(alternated) ex ercise
arrangement and could be
performed in a v ariety of
sequences (e.g. , back squat,
deadl ift, step-up).COMMENTS
eExercises that concentrical ly train the
lower back muscles should be perf ormed
after ex ercises that r equire an er ect torso
or a neutr al spine posi tion (e.g. , lunge
and later al shoulder r aise). F atigue of the
lower back muscles can r esult in incorr ect
and potential ly injurious ex ercise
1220
dAlthough the barbel l biceps
curl ex ercise is a “pul ling”
movement and oc curs bef ore
another “pul l” exercise
(shoulder shrug), i t does not
affect the athlete’ s ability to
perform the shoulder shrug
exercise.technique in structur al or standing
exercises.
1221
Step 5: Training Load and Repetitions
Load  most simply refers to the amount of weight assigned to an exercise set
and is often characteriz ed as the most critical aspect of a resistance training
program (50, 106, 162, 163).
Terminology Used to Quantify and Qualify
Mechanical Work
Mechanical work  can be defined as the product of force and displacement
(sometimes referred to as distance ). An athlete  can perform (external)
mechanical work via demands made on the body to gener ate (internal)
metabol ic energy. Thus, it is important to quanti fy the amount of mechanical
work or degree of metabol ic demand to plan variation in the training program
and to avoid the exhaustion phase of Selye’s Gener al Adaptation Syndrome
associated wi th overtraining (33, 148).
A quanti ty measur e for resistance training work is needed. Traditional ly, at
least in the sport of weight lifting, this work is called the load, and one can
calculate it by multiplying each weight lifted by the number of times it is lifted
and summing all such values over a training session. Volume–load  is a proxy
for work, because displacem ent and force production are not measur ed in
applied settings. Howev er, volume–load  (90) is a better term than just load. This
quanti ty is related to mech anical work and the associated metabol ic energy
demands and physiological stress and is distinguished from repetition-volume
(i.e., the total number of r epetitions; see Step 6: V olume f or mor e explanation).
Volume–load should be consider ed as system mass volume–load  in the
calculation of resistance training in which the athlete or a mass is moved (e.g.,
loaded jump squats). For example, an 80-kilogram athlete with a 40-kilogram
jump squat load for 4 sets of 3 is doing 120 kilograms × 12, or 1,440 kilograms.
In contrast, when the athlet e’s mass is not being lifted (e.g., bench press or
shoulder press), only the external load should be included in the volume–load
calculation. Volume–load approaches are also useful in quantifying the nature of
the total resistance training load, by separ ating the volume–load from core and
assistance exercises or delineating between hypertr ophy, maximal strength, and
power training. In this way, the strength and condi tioning professional can plan
or determine not just the total volume–load for the session but also what
stimulus is achiev ed primari ly from the session.
The typical calculation of volume–load (i.e., sets × repetitions × load) does
not account for the distance that external load is traveling. Given that athletes
possess unique  anthropometr ic characteristics (e.g., heigh t and arm length), the
1222
amount of work being performed by athletes within a training session may vary.
For example, athletes who are 5 feet 6 inches (1.68 m) and 6 feet (1.83 m) in
statur e who perform the back squat exercise with the same load and to the
same squat depth are performing different magni tudes of work based on the
displacement of the barbel l. Within this scenario , the taller athlete must move
(displace) the external load a greater distance, which results in performing more
work than the shorter athlete. When monitoring training load, load displacement
can be accounted for by calculating volume–load displacement , which
multiplies volume–load by the displacement of the exercise. Although strongly
correlated to volume–load, resear chers have indicat ed that volume–load
displacement may provide a better indicator of an athlete’ s overall workload
totals (78). Thus, if strength and condi tioning professionals have the time to
measur e the displacements of exercises for their athlet es (using appropriate
technology), greater insight into how athletes respond to various training phases
may be pr ovided.
Note that the volume–load is not affected by the set and repetition scheme
(e.g., 15 sets of 1 repetition, 5 sets of 3 repetitions, 3 sets of 5 repetitions, or 1
set of 15 repetitions). Various set and repetition schemes affect the true
intensity  value for resistance exercise and indicate the quality of work
performed. Instead of using time to calculate mechanical or metabol ic power or
intensi ty, it is more practical to use a value that is proportional to time—namely ,
rep-volume. The more repetitions performed, the longer the training session;
rest period lengths are an additional consider ation and are not directly
accounted for. Dividing volume–load by rep-volume results in the average weight
lifted per r epetition per work out session (162).
Relationship Between Load and Repetitions
The number of times an exercise can be performed (repetitions ) is inversely
related to the load lifted; the heavier the load, the lower the number of
repetitions that can be performed. Therefore, focusing on one training goal
automatical ly implies the use of a certain load and repetition regimen (e.g.,
training for maximal muscul ar strength involves lifting very heavy loads [i.e.,
≥80% 1RM] f or few repetitions [i.e. , ≤6 repetitions]).
Before assigning training loads, the strength and condi tioning professional
should unders tand this relationship between loads and repetitions. Load is
commonly described as either a certain percentage of a 1-repetition
maximum (1RM)—the greatest  amount of weight that can be lifted with
proper techniq ue for only 1 repetition—or the most weight lifted for a specified
number of repetitions, an xRM. For instance , if athletes can perform 10
repetitions with 60 kilograms in the back squat exercise, the 10RM is 60
1223
kilograms. It is assumed that the athlete provided a maximal effort; if he or she
had stopped at 9 repetitions but could have performed 1 more, a 10RM would
not have been achiev ed. Likewise, if he or she lifted 55 kilograms for 10
repetitions but could have performed more, the true 10RM was not accurately
assessed because the athlete possibly could have lifted 60 kilograms for 10
repetitions.
Table 18.8 shows the relationship between a submaximal load—calc ulated as
a percentage of the 1RM— and the number of repetitions that can be performed
at that load. By defini tion, 100% of the 1RM allows the athlete to perform 1
repetition. As the percentage of the 1RM (i.e., the load lifted) decreases, the
athlete will be able to successfully complete more repetitions. Howev er, strength
and condi tioning professionals should be cautious because the number of
repetitions that can be performed at a given load may be specific to the exercise
as wel l as the individual (120, 134).
TABLE 18.8  Percent of the 1RM and Repetitions Allowed
(%1RM–Repetition Relationship)
%1RM Number of reps allowed
100 1
95 2
93 3
90 4
87 5
85 6
83 7
80 8
77 9
75 10
70 11
67 12
65 15
Note:  The number of reps performed at each percentage may be based on individual characteristics as
well as the ex ercise being perf ormed (120, 134).
Data f rom Hoeger et al. (1987); Hoeger et al. (1990); Ma yhew et al. (1992).
1224
Although %1RM–r epetition tables provide helpful guidel ines for assigning an
athlete’ s training loads, resear ch to date does not support  the widespr ead use of
such tables for establ ishing training loads for every exercise assigned to athletes,
for the f ollowing r easons:
Table 18.8 assum es there is a linear association between the loads lifted
and the repetitions performed; howev er, several studies have reported a
curvilinear r elationship (95, 99, 103).
Resistance-tr ained athletes may be able to exceed the number of
repetitions listed in the table at any given percentage of their 1RM,
especial ly in lower body cor e exercises (74 , 75, 120, 134).
The number of repetitions that can be performed at a certain percentage
of the 1RM is based on a single set. When an athlete performs multiple
sets, the loads may need to be reduced so that the desired number of
repetitions can be completed in all the sets. Despi te the prevalence of 1RM
resear ch, athletes may not always perform the predicted number of
repetitions at a specified percentage of a 1RM. For instance, resear chers
have shown that subjects were able to perform two or three times  more
repetitions than ar e listed in table 18.8  (74, 75, 134).
A certain percentage of the 1RM assigned to a machine exercise can result
in more repetitions at the same percentage of the 1RM than with a similar
free weight ex ercise (74 , 75).
Exercises involving smaller muscle areas may not produce as many
repetitions as seen in table 18.8, and exercises recruiting large muscle
areas ar e likely to r esult in mor e repetitions perf ormed (183).
Empirical evidence further suggests that as the percentage of the 1RM
decreases, the variabi lity in the number of repetitions that can be
completed increases. For example, the most accurate relationship between
percentages of the 1RM and the maximum repetitions possible is for loads
greater than 75% of the 1RM and fewer than 10 repetitions (133) with
greater ac curacy coming wi th even lower r epetitions (45).
Therefore, loads calculated from the %1RM in table 18.8 should be used only
as a guidel ine for estimatin g a particular RM load for a resistance training
exercise. Even with the inherent weaknesses just explaine d, it appears that it is
still more accurate to assign loads based on a percentag e of a test-establ ished
1RM than i t is to estimate a 1RM f rom a submaximal load (74 , 75).
1RM and xRM Testing Options
To gather information needed to assign a training load, the strength and
condi tioning pr ofessional has the option of determining the athlete’ s
1225
actual 1RM (dir ectly tested),
estimated 1RM f rom an xRM test (e.g. , a 10RM), or
xRM based on the number of repetitions planned for that exercise (the
“goal” r epetitions; e.g. , 5 repetitions per set).
Once the actua l 1RM is measured or estimated, the athlete’ s training load is
calculated as a percentage of the 1RM. Alternativ ely, a xRM test may be
performed based on goal repetitions, thereby eliminating computations or
estimations. In many cases, the strength and condi tioning  professional will use a
variety of testing options depending on the exercises selected and the athlete’ s
training backgr ound. A common strategy for testing sufficiently condi tioned
athletes is to conduct a 1RM test in several core exercises and use xRM testing
for assistance ex ercises.
Testing the 1RM
To assign training loads based on a percentage of the 1RM, the strength and
condi tioning professional must first determine the athlete’ s 1RM. This method of
assessment is typical ly reserv ed for resistance-tr ained athletes who are classified
as intermediat e or advanced and have exercise techniq ue experience in the
exercises being tested; however, 1RM testing can be safely performed with
youth (19), adolescents (49), inexperienced adults (24), and older adults (127).
Individuals who are untrained, inexperienced, injured, or medical ly supervised
may not be appropriate participants for 1RM testing. One-r epetition maximum
testing requires an adequate  training status and lifting experience, because the
assessment of maximal strength places significant stress on the involved
muscles, connectiv e tissues, and joints, although this has been shown to be
appropriate and reliable in youth and collegiate athletes  with approximately 6
months’ experience in the power clean and back squat (24, 49). Howev er, it may
be more appropriate to complete a 3RM test instead of a maximal 1RM test
because ignori ng an athlete’ s training status and exercise technique experience
diminishes the saf ety and ac curacy of 1RM test r esults.
When selectin g exercises for 1RM testing, the strength and condi tioning
professional should choose core exercises, because the large muscle groups and
multiple joints are better able to handle the heavy loads. Despi te this guidel ine,
an exercise should not be selected for 1RM testing if it cannot provide valid and
reliable data (i.e., does not accurately and consistently assess maximal muscular
strength). For instance, the large upper back musculatur e and multiple joints
involved in the bent-over row exercise can probably tolerate the loads for a 1RM
test, but maintaining a correct body position throughout testing would be
extremely difficult. The weaker stabilizing muscles of the lower back might
1226
become very fatigued after several testing sets, resulting in a loss of proper
exercise technique and an in valid test.
A variety of procedur es can be used to accurately determine a 1RM; one
method is described in figure 18.8. Despite an orderly testing sequence,
variations in training status and exercise type will affect the absolute load
increases in sequential testing sets. For example, the gradual load increase for
1RM attempts for an athlete who can back squat 495 pounds (225 kg) may be
20 to 30 pounds (9-14 kg) per testing set. For a weaker athlete with a back
squat 1RM of 100 pounds (45 kg), a 20- or 30-pound testing load increment is
too aggressive and is not precise enough to yield an accurate 1RM value. To
improve the appropriateness and accuracy of the sequen tial testing sets, figure
18.8 also includes relative percentages that can be used instead of the absolute
load adjustments.
Estimating a 1RM
When maximal strength testing is not warranted, testing with a 3RM or 5RM
load (and then estimating or predicting the 1RM) can be a suitable secondary
option. This approach is appropriate for nearly all athletes, provided they can
demonstr ate the proper technique in the exercise tested. Core and assistance
exercises can be selected for RM testing, but excessiv e warm-up and testing sets
may fatigue the athlete and compr omise the accuracy of the test. It should be
noted, howev er, that the level of accuracy of predicting a 1RM from other xRM
tests becomes less accurate (i.e., commonly resulting in overestimations of the
1RM) as the number of repetitions completed increases and may also be
affected by the type of training with which the athlete is familiar (134).
Additional ly, power exercises do not lend themselv es well to xRM testing above 5
repetitions for repeated testing sets because technique can deterior ate rapidly
(71). Lower (and more accurate) xRM determinations using heavier loads can be
made once the athlete has suf ficient tr aining and technique experience.
The protocol for multiple RM testing is similar to that for 1RM testing, but
each set requires multiple repetitions, not one. After the completion of warm-up
sets, the athlete’s sequential  load changes for the 10RM  test are smaller than
those listed in figure 18.8 (approximately one-hal f). Continue the process of
testing until a load allowing the selected number of repetitions is determined. An
experienced strength and conditioning professional will be able to adjust the
loads so that the mul tiple RM can be measur ed wi thin 3 to 5 testing sets.
Using a 1RM Table  To estimate the athlete’ s 1RM, consul t table 18.9. In the
“Maximum repetitions (RM)” = 10 (%1RM = 75) row, first find the tested 10RM
load; then read across the row to the “Maximum repetitions (RM)” = 1 (%1RM
= 100) row to discover the athlete’ s projected 1RM. For example, if an athlete’ s
1227
10RM is 300 pounds, the estimated 1RM is 400 pounds. As noted in connection
with table 18.8 (page 544), the %1RM– repetition associations vary in the
literature. This table is intended for use as a guide until the athlete has
developed the neuromuscular attributes that will make testing with heavier loads
(e.g., 1RM-5RM) safe and effective. As noted earlier, one should be mindf ul that
the ac curacy of the pr ediction r educes the r epetitions’ incr ease (134).
Figure 18.8 A 1RM testing protocol.
1. Instruct the athlete to w arm up wi th a light resistance that easi ly allows 5 to 10 r epetitions.
2. Provide a 1-minute r est period.
3. Estimate a warm-up load that will allow the athlete to complete three to five repetitions by
adding
10 to 20 pounds (4-9 kg) or 5% to 10% f or upper body ex ercise or
30 to 40 pounds (14-18 kg) or 10% to 20% f or lower body ex ercise.
4. Provide a 2-minute r est period.
5. Estimate a conserv ative, near-maximal load that will allow the athlete to complete two or
three repetitions b y adding
10 to 20 pounds (4-9 kg) or 5% to 10% f or upper body ex ercise or
30 to 40 pounds (14-18 kg) or 10% to 20% f or lower body ex ercise.
6. Provide a 2- to 4-minute r est period.
7. Make a load incr ease:
10 to 20 pounds (4-9 kg) or 5% to 10% f or upper body ex ercise or
30 to 40 pounds (14-18 kg) or 10% to 20% f or lower body ex ercise
8. Instruct the athlete to at tempt a 1RM.
9. If the athlete was successful, provide a 2- to 4-minute rest period and go back to step 7. If
the athlete failed, provide a 2- to 4-minute rest period; then decrease the load by
subtracting
5 to 10 pounds (2-4 kg) or 2.5% to 5% f or upper body ex ercise or
15 to 20 pounds (7-9 kg) or 5% to 10% f or lower body ex ercise.
AND then go back to step 8.
Continue increasing or decreasing the load until the athlete can complete one repetition with
proper exercise technique. Ideally, the athlete’ s 1RM will be measur ed within three to five testing
sets.
Reprinted b y permission f rom R.W . Earle, “W eight T raining Ex ercise Pr escription, ” in Essentials of
Personal T raining S ymposium W orkbook  (NSCA Certi fication Commission, 2006), 3-39.
Using Predict ion Equations  Equations are also available to predict the 1RM
from xRM loads (103, 104). Resear chers who have reviewed such equations
report that as the loads used in xRM testing become heavier (i.e., bringing the
loads closer to the actual 1RM), the accuracy of the 1RM estimation increases
(45). Furtherm ore, the results obtained from lower xRM testing (and subsequent
predictions of the 1RM) are gener ally more accurate when an athlete has been
1228
consistently training with low xRM resistances (i.e., heavy loads) for a few
months bef ore testing (14).
xRM Testing Based on Goal Repetitions
A third option for determining training loads requires the strength and
condi tioning professional to first decide on the number of repetitions (i.e., the
goal repetitions ) the athlete will perform in the actual program for the
exercise being tested. For example, if the strength and condi tioning professional
decides that the athlete should perform 6 repetitions for the bench press
exercise in the training program, the xRM testing protocol should have the
athlete perform the exercise with a load that will result in 6 repetitions (6RM).
Core and assistance exercises can be selected for xRM testing, but as previously
mentioned, high-repetition testing sets can create significant fatigue and may
compr omise the accuracy of the tested xRM. This effect seems to be more
problematic for exercises that involve multiple joints and large muscle areas due
to their high metabol ic demand (138, 185). Further , xRM testing (and
subsequent load assignments) for assistance exercises should be at or above an
8RM to minimiz e the isolativ e stress on the involved joint and connectiv e tissue
(2, 46). In other words, even if an athlete is following a muscular strength
training program that involves 2RM loads for the core exercises, the heaviest
load the assistance ex ercises should be assigned is an 8RM.
TABLE 18.9  Estimating 1RM and Training Loads
Maximum repetitions (RM) 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 12 15
%1RM 100 95 93 90 87 85 83 80 77 75 67 65
Load (pounds or ki lograms) 10 10 9 9 9 9 8 8 8 8 7 7
20 19 19 18 17 17 17 16 15 15 13 13
30 29 28 27 26 26 25 24 23 23 20 20
40 38 37 36 35 34 33 32 31 30 27 26
50 48 47 45 44 43 42 40 39 38 34 33
60 57 56 54 52 51 50 48 46 45 40 39
70 67 65 63 61 60 58 56 54 53 47 46
80 76 74 72 70 68 66 64 62 60 54 52
90 86 84 81 78 77 75 72 69 68 60 59
100 95 93 90 87 85 83 80 77 75 67 65
110 105 102 99 96 94 91 88 85 83 74 72
1229
120 114 112 108 104 102 100 96 92 90 80 78
130 124 121 117 113 111 108 104 100 98 87 85
140 133 130 126 122 119 116 112 108 105 94 91
150 143 140 135 131 128 125 120 116 113 101 98
160 152 149 144 139 136 133 128 123 120 107 104
170 162 158 153 148 145 141 136 131 128 114 111
180 171 167 162 157 153 149 144 139 135 121 117
190 181 177 171 165 162 158 152 146 143 127 124
200 190 186 180 174 170 166 160 154 150 134 130
210 200 195 189 183 179 174 168 162 158 141 137
220 209 205 198 191 187 183 176 169 165 147 143
230 219 214 207 200 196 191 184 177 173 154 150
240 228 223 216 209 204 199 192 185 180 161 156
250 238 233 225 218 213 208 200 193 188 168 163
260 247 242 234 226 221 206 208 200 195 174 169
270 257 251 243 235 230 224 216 208 203 181 176
280 266 260 252 244 238 232 224 216 210 188 182
290 276 270 261 252 247 241 232 223 218 194 189
300 285 279 270 261 255 249 240 231 225 201 195
310 295 288 279 270 264 257 248 239 233 208 202
320 304 298 288 278 272 266 256 246 240 214 208
330 314 307 297 287 281 274 264 254 248 221 215
340 323 316 306 296 289 282 272 262 255 228 221
350 333 326 315 305 298 291 280 270 263 235 228
360 342 335 324 313 306 299 288 277 270 241 234
Maximum repetitions (RM) 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 12 15
%1RM 370 352 344 333 322 315 307 296 285 278 248 241
Load (pounds or ki lograms) 380 361 353 342 331 323 315 304 293 285 255 247
390 371 363 351 339 332 324 312 300 293 261 254
400 380 372 360 348 340 332 320 308 300 268 260
Data f rom Hoeger et al. (1987); Hoeger et al. (1990); Ma yhew et al. (1992).
1230
410 390 381 369 357 349 340 328 316 308 274 267
420 399 391 378 365 357 349 336 323 315 281 273
430 409 400 387 374 366 357 344 331 323 288 280
440 418 409 396 383 374 365 352 339 330 295 286
450 428 419 405 392 383 374 360 347 338 302 293
460 437 428 414 400 391 382 368 354 345 308 299
470 447 437 423 409 400 390 376 362 353 315 306
480 456 446 432 418 408 398 384 370 360 322 312
490 466 456 441 426 417 407 392 377 368 328 319
500 475 465 450 435 425 415 400 385 375 335 325
510 485 474 459 444 434 423 408 393 383 342 332
520 494 484 468 452 442 432 416 400 390 348 338
530 504 493 477 461 451 440 424 408 398 355 345
540 513 502 486 470 459 448 432 416 405 362 351
550 523 512 495 479 468 457 440 424 413 369 358
560 532 521 504 487 476 465 448 431 420 375 364
570 542 530 513 496 485 473 456 439 428 382 371
580 551 539 522 505 493 481 464 447 435 389 377
590 561 549 531 513 502 490 472 454 443 395 384
600 570 558 540 522 510 498 480 462 450 402 390
Data f rom Hoeger et al. (1987); Hoeger et al. (1990); Ma yhew et al. (1992).
Rating of Perceived Exertion and Repetitions in
Reserve
Beyond percentages of 1RM, other methods of load prescription are available to
strength and condi tioning professionals. The rating of perceived exertion
(RPE)  provides a subjectiv e measur ement of work based on the perception of
an individual. While the original RPE scale (i.e., 6-20) was based on aerobic
activity (15), a modified CR10 scale (i.e., 0-10) has been examined by
resear chers when monitoring resistance training exercise intensi ty within an
individual set (92, 135) and during entire training sessions (i.e., session RPE)
(37, 107, 181). Similarly, repetitions in reserve (RIR)  provides a subjectiv e
measur e of the perceived number of repetitions that theoretically could be
performed following an exercise set (199). Hackett and colleagues (64, 66)
1231
displa yed very large relationships between estimated RIR and actual RIR and
showed that RIR estimations become more accurate when exercise sets are
performed closer to failure. These findings are supported by additional
resear chers (100, 198); thus, strength and condi tioning professionals must
consider that the relative intensi ty of each exercise set may need to be higher
for this method to be usef ul for load pr escription purposes.
When impleme nting RPE and RIR, it is recommended to prescribe intensi ties
in the form of ranges (e.g., RPE of 7-8 or RIR of 2-3) (176). Although relatively
few studies exist, some have shown that load prescription based on RPE for 8
weeks (73) and RIR for 12 weeks (60) may lead to greater strength
improvements compar ed to using percentages of 1RM. Howev er, further studies
with additional athlete popul ations are needed before concr ete conclusions can
be drawn. RPE and RIR may be best used if combined with an objectiv e method
(e.g., percentage of 1RM) so that the desired loads for a given exercise can be
determined before using RPE/RIR to adjust the load for autoregulation purposes
(176). Professionals should note that the ability to gauge physical exertion may
vary based on athletic experience (4). For example, inexperienced athletes may
not understand what a near-maximal or maximal resistance training effort feels
like. Thus, strength and conditioning professionals should consider limiting load
autonom y until the athletes  can displa y proficiency with the RPE and RIR
methods.
Set-Repetition Best
Original ly proposed by Stone and O’Bryant (162), set-repetition best (SRB)  is
a load prescrip tion method that uses relative intensi ties (i.e., percent ranges)
where the maximum load is estimated based on performances of a given set and
repetition scheme. In other words, SRB determines loads based on percentages
of what was performed in training. Specifically, 5% ranges are prescribed to
allow strength  and condi tioning professionals to observ e the performance of
their athletes and incorpor ate athlete feedback as a means of autoregulation.
Beyond the ability to adjust weekly training prescription, SRB allows specific
training loads to be estima ted when prescribing different set and repetition
schemes (e.g., loads for 3 sets of 5 repetitions should be approximately 15%
less than 3 sets of 2 repetitions) (162, 176). Compar ed to prescribing xRM
percentages based on single sets, SRB is based on multiple sets so that an
athlete’ s training loads are based on relative percentages of the prescribed set-
repetition scheme. Using SRB, any set-repetition scheme can be prescribed and
progressed using relative 5% ranges. For example, 3 sets of 5 repetitions or 3
sets of 10 repetitions can be prescribed with 85% to 90% of the respectiv e
estimated maximal load for 3 sets of 5 or 3 sets of 10, respectiv ely, in week 1 of
1232
a training phase and progress to 90% to 95% the following week. Within a
single week of training, heavy days are typical ly prescribed with loads
approximately 10% to 15% heavier than the lighter days of training (42). Thus,
SRB may account for the fatigue that accumulates across multiple sets during
training. This may allow training loads to be adjusted on a weekly basis without
the need to perform RM testing on a regular basis. Table 18.10 shows SRB
relative intensi ties as they r elate to load ef fort of both RPE and RIR.
TABLE 18.10  Subjective Loading Efforts and Corresponding
Set-Repetition Best Relative Percentages
Load effortRating of perceived
exertion Repetitions in reserve Relative percentage
Maximal 10 0
No addi tional load100
9.5 0
Could incr ease load
Very hea vy 9 1 95-99
8.5 1-2
Heavy 8 2 90-94
7.5 2-3
Moder ate-hea vy 7 3 85-89
6-7 3-4
Moder ate 5-6 4 80-84
4-5
Light-moder ate 5 5 75-79
Light 4-5 5-6 70-74
Very light 3-4 Light ef fort <70
Very, very light 1-2 Little or no ef fort <60
Adapted by permission from S. McKeever and R. Howard, “Resistance Training, ” in NSCA ’s Guide to High
School Strength and Condi tioning , edited for the National Strength and Condi tioning Association by P.
McHenry and M. Nitka (Human Kinetic s, 2022), 240 and M.C. Zourdos, A. Klemp, C. Dolan, et al., “Novel
Resistance Training- Specific Rating of Perceived Exertion Scale Measuring Repetitions in Reserv e,” The
Journal of Strength and Condi tioning Resear ch 30, no. 1 (2016): 269. Adapted from DeWeese et al.
(2014).
A growing body of resear ch supports the use of SRB as a method of load
prescription (17, 18, 79, 164, 171-173). Resear chers have shown that SRB may
produce more favorable muscle architectur al (e.g., type I and II hypertr ophy and
1233
myosin heavy chain adaptations) and strength (e.g., isometric peak and rapid
force productio n) adaptations compar ed to RM training (17, 18). Like other
methods of load prescription, strength and condi tioning professionals should
take a conserv ative approach before progressing to heavier loads. Beyond the
initial weeks of training, previous training blocks may be used as starting points
for upcoming blocks. For example, the heaviest loads used during a gener al
strength block (e.g., 3 sets of 6 repetitions) may serve as the starting loads for
an absolute strength block (e.g., 3 sets of 3 repetitions). Readers are directed to
previous l iterature for mor e thor ough inf ormation on SRB (162, 176).
Assigning Load and Repetitions Based on the
Training Goal
During the needs analysis,  the strength and condi tioning professional is
challenged to choose the primary goal of the resistance training program based
on the athlete’ s testing results, the movement and physiological analysis of the
sport, and the priorities of the athlete’ s sport season. Once decided on, the
training goal can be applied to determine specific load and repetition
assignments via the RM continuum and the chosen loading method. As
explained previously , the testing methods determine how the loads and
repetitions are assigned for each exercise (i.e., loads are calculated as a
percentage of a tested or estimated 1RM, or training loads are specifically
determined from xRM testing). The options for testing and assigning training
loads and r epetitions ar e summariz ed in figure 18.9 .
1234
FIGURE 18.9  Summary of testing and assigning tr aining loads and r epetitions.
Reprinted by permission from R.W. Earle, “Weight Training Exercise Prescription,” in Essentials of Personal Training Symposium Workbook
(NSCA Certification Commission, 2006), 3-39.
Repetition Maximum Continuum
Figure 18.10  represents how RM ranges have been historical ly associated with
training goals. In gener al, relatively heavy loads should be used if the goal is
maximal strength, whereas light loads should be used to develop muscular
endur ance. To state this another way, low xRMs appear to have the greatest
effect on maximal strength and high xRMs seem to result in better muscula r
endur ance improvements (65, 106, 141). In contrast to strength and muscular
endur ance, a spectrum of RM loads may be used to develop muscle hypertr ophy.
For example, resear chers have reported that similar magni tudes of hypertr ophy
can be produced after eight weeks of training when using either a low-load (25-
1235
35 repetitions performed to failure with approximately 30%-50% 1RM) or high-
load (8-12 repetitions performed with approximately 70%-80% 1RM) training
protocol that is performed to muscular failure (144). The same resear ch group
followed up this study with a meta- analysis that showed no difference in muscle
hypertr ophy changes following various training protocols performed to muscular
failure using lighter (<60% 1RM) and heavier (>60% 1RM) loads (141). As
greater muscle activation was shown during multiple heavier versus lighter (i.e.,
80% vs. 30% 1RM) sets performed to failure (82), high-load, lower -repetition
sets may be consider ed more efficient at producing hypertr ophic adaptations
and benefiting muscular strength due to the neural adaptations associated with
this characteri stic (1). Strength and condi tioning professionals should also be
cautious in prescribing multiple low-load sets to failure to mitigate potential
injury (109).
FIGURE 18.10  Classic continuum that shows how RM r anges ar e associated wi th various tr aining goals.
*The repetition ranges shown for power in this figure are not consistent with the %1RM–r epetition
relationship . Refer to the discussion of assigning per centages f or power tr aining f or further explanation.
Therefore, while the classic RM continuum effectively illustrates that a certain
RM zone emphasiz es a specific outcome, the training benefi ts may be blended at
any given RM. Howev er, figure 18.11 represents an updated version of the RM
continuum that is supported b y the emer ging l iterature.
1236
FIGURE 18.11  RM continuum that shows how RM ranges emphasiz e different training goals while
accounting f or the expansiv e range of loads that can be used f or hypertr ophy.
* The repetition ranges shown for hypertr ophy may vary depending on the set and repetition scheme as
well as the loads used (141, 187).
Adapted from Stone et al. (1982) and Fleck and Kraemer (2014).
Percentage of the 1RM
Despi te the physiological blend of training effects, the specificity principle still
dictates the dominant outcom e that is attained and enhanced with a particular
training load. The relationship between the percentage of the 1RM and the
estimated number of repetitions that can be performed at that load (table 18.8,
page 544) allows the strength and condi tioning professional to assign a specific
resistance to be used for an exercise in a training session. In other words, the
training goal is attained when the athlete lifts a load of a certain percentage of
the 1RM f or a speci fic number of r epetitions ( table 18.11 ).
TABLE 18.11  Load and Repetition Assignments Based on the
Training Goal
Training goal Load (%1RM) Goal reps
Strengtha ≥85 ≤6
Multiple-ef fortb event 75-85 3-5
aThese RM loading assignments for muscular strength training apply only to core exercises; assistance
exercises should be l imited to loads not hea vier than an 8RM (2).
bBased on weightl ifting-deriv ed movements (e.g., clean and snatch). The load and repetition assignments
shown for power in this table are not consis tent with the %1RM–r epetition relationship . In nonexplosiv e
movements, loads equal ing about 80% of the 1RM apply to the 2- to 5-repetition range. Refer to the
discussion of assigning per centages of the 1RM f or power tr aining f or further explanation.
Data from Berger (1962); Peterson et al. (2004); Peterson et al. (2005); Swinton et al. (2024); Tesch
(1992).
1237
Hypertr ophy 67-80 8-12
Muscular endur ance ≤67 ≥12
aThese RM loading assignments for muscular strength training apply only to core exercises; assistance
exercises should be l imited to loads not hea vier than an 8RM (2).
bBased on weightl ifting-deriv ed movements (e.g., clean and snatch). The load and repetition assignments
shown for power in this table are not consis tent with the %1RM–r epetition relationship . In nonexplosiv e
movements, loads equal ing about 80% of the 1RM apply to the 2- to 5-repetition range. Refer to the
discussion of assigning per centages of the 1RM f or power tr aining f or further explanation.
Data from Berger (1962); Peterson et al. (2004); Peterson et al. (2005); Swinton et al. (2024); Tesch
(1992).
How to Calculate a Traini ng Load  If an athlete’ s training goal is muscular
strength and the tested 1RM in the bench press exercise is 220 pounds (100 kg),
to increase strength, the athlete needs to handle loads of at least 85% of the
1RM (after warm-up) that typical ly allow performance of up to 6 repetitions
within a single set (table 18.11). More specifically, if the strength and
condi tioning professional assigns 4 repetitions for this exercise, the
corresponding load could be approximately 90% of the 1RM (table 18.8), or
approximately 200 pounds (91 kg). Note that the strength and condi tioning
professional should make adjustments to the assign ed loads based on
observ ation of the ease or difficulty an athlete experiences in lifting the load for
the required repetitions. Moreover, it is important to avoid training to failure on a
regular basis because it may not be necessary to maximiz e muscular
hypertr ophy, strength, or power adaptations (36, 63, 137, 191). By minimizing
training to failure, strength  and condi tioning professionals may reduce the
overall training  strain on athletes while still providing  an effective training
stimulus and maximizing perf ormance gains (17 , 18).
Assigning Percentages for Power Training  The force–velocity curve
illustrates that the greater the amount of concentric muscular force gener ated,
the slower the muscle shortening and corresponding movement velocity (and
vice versa). Maximal power , in contrast, may be produced at intermediate
velocities with the lifting of light to moder ate loads in nonbal listic, traditional
resistance training exercises such as the squat or bench press (27, 105, 154,
157). Performing a 1RM involves slower movement velocities; near-maximal
forces are gener ated but with reduced power output (56, 197). Seldom is an
athlete required to demonstr ate a singular , maximal, slow-speed muscular
strength effort in a sport (except in powerl ifting, for example). Most sport
movements are faster and involve higher power outputs than those produced
during a 1RM test (89, 118). This does not mean that an athlete’ s power
capabi lities are unaffected by maximal muscular strength training, howev er.
1238
Because speed- or power -related sport movements often begin from zero or
near-zero velocities, slow-velocity strength gains have direct application to rapid
force developm ent and power production (1, 22). For these reasons, the load
and repetition assignments for power training overlap the guidel ines for strength
training ( table 18.11 ).
Non-weightl ifting, multijoint power exercises (e.g., jump squat, bench press
throw, overhead press throw) and single-joint muscle action data reveal that
peak power is gener ally reached with the lifting of very light loads—f rom body
weight (0%) to 30% of the 1RM (27, 105, 154, 157, 174, 175). Performing some
of these exercises (e.g., bench press throw and overhead press throw) in a
Smith machine , for example, can help to address the safety issues. On the other
end of the load continuum, data from multiple national- and world-class
weightl ifting and powerl ifting championships clearly indicate that power output
increases as the weight lifted decreases from 100% of the 1RM (i.e., the 1RM)
to 90% of the 1RM (56). In fact, for the back squat and deadl ift exercises,
power output for a load at 90% of the 1RM may be twice as high as with the
1RM load due to a large decrease in the time required to complete the exercise
with the lighter load (57). Even for the already “fast” power exercises
(weightl ifting-based movements), there is still a 5% to 10% increase in power
output as the load decreases from the 1RM to 90% of the 1RM (57). Considering
these issues, the most effective and practical application is to assign loads that
are about 75% to 90% of the 1RM for resistance training exercises that can be
heavily loaded such as the snatch and clean and other weightl ifting-deriv ed
movements (27, 56, 105). However, the loading that maximiz es power output in
weightl ifting movements and their derivatives is exercise specific. For example,
the highest power outputs of catching variations (e.g., hang power clean and
power clean) were shown between 60% and 80% 1RM (20, 83, 85, 168), while
pulling derivatives may maxim ize power output at either lighter (i.e., <50% 1RM
of a catching variation) (86, 167, 169, 179, 180) or at much heavier loads (i.e.,
100%-120% 1RM) (23, 25, 111, 112, 115) depending on the velocity (e.g., jump
shrug and hang high pull) or force potential (e.g., countermo vement shrug, mid-
thigh pull, hang pull) of the exercises, respectiv ely. Strength and condi tioning
professionals should also not overlook the use of overhead pressing derivatives
(e.g., push press and jerk) for developing power output (156). Resear chers have
shown that maximal power output during the jerk and back jerk occurred
between 80% and 90% 1RM of the respectiv e exercises in competi tive
weightl ifters (51). Howev er, strength and condi tioning professionals should note
that there were no differences in power output or other kinetic variables
between the push press, push jerk, and split jerk using 80% of the 1RM push
press in r esistance-tr ained men and women (155).
1239
To promote program specificity, particular load and repetition assignments are
indicated for athletes training for single-ef fort power events (e.g., shot put, high
jump, weightl ifting) and for multiple-ef fort power events (e.g., basketball and
volleybal l). For example, single-ef fort-event athletes may be assigned sets of 1
or 2 repetitions using loads that equal 80% to 90% of the 1RM, especial ly on
heavy training days. For sports with multiple maximum-p ower efforts (e.g., the
frequent maximum vertical jumping motions of a volleyball blocker), 3 to 5
repetitions per set with loads at 75% to 85% of the 1RM may be most
appropriate. Howev er, strength and condi tioning professionals should consider
the training season that the athlete is currently in to ensur e that fatigue is being
appropriately managed.
On the basis of the %1RM–r epetition relationships shown in table 18.8 (page
544), the strength and condi tioning professional may question the load
assignments for power training in table 18.11. The %1RM loads may appear to
be too low compar ed to the goal number of repetitions. For example, according
to table 18.8, 3 to 5 repetitions are typical ly associated with loads 93% to 87%
of the 1RM, not 75% to 85% of the 1RM or less as table 18.11  indicates. Power
exercises cannot be maxima lly loaded at any repetition scheme, because the
quality of the movement technique will decline before momentary muscle fatigue
defines a true xRM set (71). Therefore, lighter loads allow the athlete to
complete repetitions with maximum speed to promote maximum power
development. For example, power exercises are usually limited to 5 repetitions
per set, but with loads up to and equal to a 10RM (i.e., approximately 75% of
the 1RM). This load adjustment to promote peak power output also applies to
the RM continu um (figure 18.10, page 551). Power training can be emphasized
across the range of 5 repetitions or fewer, but the strength and condi tioning
professional should realize that these loads are not true RMs. Howev er, exercises
with a smaller displacement (e.g., countermo vement shrug and hang pull) may
allow the performance of at least 6 repetitions with supramaximal loads (>100%
1RM power clean) without decreases in force production characteristics or
changes in technique acr oss repetitions (113, 114).
Variation of the Training Load
Training for muscular strength and power places a high physiological stress on
an athlete’ s body. Intermediate and advanced resistance-tr ained athletes are
accustomed to lifting heavy loads and possess the experience and motiv ation to
exert to near failure during every set, but this should not always be the goal.
Despi te the high training status, this degree of training demand typical ly cannot
be tolerated very long without contributing to an overtrained state (176). For
example, an athlete may resistance train three days a week with muscular
1240
strength as the goal (e.g., Monda ys, Wednesda ys, and Fridays). It would be
difficult for the athlete to perform the same high-load, low-volume regimen—
especial ly in the power and other core exercises— with only one or two days of
rest between sessions. As noted previously , training to failure may not be
necessary to pr omote the desir ed training adaptations (36, 63, 137 , 191).
One strategy to counterbala nce the monoton y associate d with lifting heavy
loads is to alter the loads (%1RMs) for the power and other core exercises so
that only one training day each week (e.g., Monda y) is a heavy day. These
heavy-day loads are designed to be high but usually with 1 to 2 RIR to avoid
training to failure. The loads for the other training days are reduced
(intentional ly) to avoid an excessiv e accumulation of fatigue after the heavy day
while still maintaining sufficient training frequency and volume. In the example
of the three-da ys-a-week program, Wednesda y can still serve as another heavy
training day (depending on the organization of workouts) (table 18.5, page 538),
while Friday may serve as the light day of the week in which 80% of the loads
lifted in the power and other core exercises on the heavy day (Monda y) are
performed with the same number of goal repetitions. Even if the athlete is able
to perform more repetitions than the designated goal number , he or she should
not do so. This approach can be used for any training frequency . For instance, a
two-da ys-a-week program could have a heavy day and a light day, or a lower
body–upper body split routine could consist of two heavy days (one lower body
day and one upper body day) followed by two lighter days. Varying the training
loads also works well with an athlete’ s other training, in that heavy lifting days
can fall on light sport condi tioning days, and light lifting days on heavy sport
condi tioning days (42). The strength and condi tioning professional needs to
monitor this schedule so that i t does not lead to hea vy training every day.
Progression of Load
As the athlete adapts to the training stimulus, the strength and condi tioning
professional needs to have a strategy for advancing exercise loads (intensi ty or
volume depending on the specific goal) so that improvements will continue over
time (progression). Monitoring each athlete’ s training and charting his or her
response to the prescribed workouts enable the strength and condi tioning
professional to know when and to what extent the loads should be incr eased.
Timing Load Increases
A conserv ative method that can be used to increase an athlete’ s training loads is
called the 2-for-2 rule (2). If the athlete can perform 2 or more repetitions
over his or her assigned repetition goal for a given exercise in the last set in two
consecutiv e workouts, weight should be added to that exercise for the next
1241
training session . For example, a strength and condi tioning  professional assigns 3
sets of 6 repetitions in the bench press exercise, and the athlete performs all 6
repetitions in all sets. After several workout sessions (the specific number
depends on many factors), the athlete can complete 8 repetitions in the third
(last) set for two consecutiv e workouts. In the following training session, the
load for that exercise should  be increased. While the 2-for-2 rule may provide
strength and condi tioning professionals with a tool to progress load in novice
athletes, this method may eventual ly promote training to failure because it does
not account for exercise technique, the goals of a given training phase, or
relative intensi ty. For example, if an athlete modifies his or her technique just to
achiev e additional repetitions, an increase in load may not be warranted until
exercise technique becomes more stable. Moreover, programming that allows for
additional repetitions to be performed (i.e., not to failure) may be by design
(176). In this instance, strength and condi tioning professionals may plan for
athletes to perform additional repetitions beyond the amount prescribed (i.e.,
RIR) with the goal of providing an overload stimulus while managing fatigue.
Thus, it is advised that the professionals understand the limitations of the 2-for-
2 rule when adjusting the load during tr aining.
Quantity of Load Increases
The decision as to the magn itude of the load increase can be difficult to make,
but table 18.12  provides gener al recomme ndations based on the athlete’ s
condi tion (stronger or weaker) and body area (upper or lower body). Despi te
these guidel ines, the significant variation in training status, volume–loads, and
exercises (type and muscular involvement) greatly influences the appropriate
load increases. To contend with this variabi lity, relative load increases of 2.5% to
10% can be used instead of the absolute values shown in table 18.12 . However,
load changes should be specific to the exercise, loading type (e.g., free weights,
elastic bands, dumbbel ls), and the method of load progression (e.g., percentage
of 1RM, RPE, RIR, SRB).
TABLE 18.12  Examples of Load Increases
Description of the athleteaBody area exercise Estimated load increasebSet-repetition
best increasesc
Weaker, less tr ained Upper body 2.5-5 lb (1-2 kg) 5%
aThe strength and condi tioning professional will need to determine which of these two
subjectiv e categories appl ies to a speci fic athlete.
bThese load increases are appropriate for training programs using approximately 3 sets
of 5 to 10 repetitions. Note that the goal repetitions per set remain consta nt as the
loads ar e incr eased.
cA planned incr ease per week, but i t will be phase speci fic, could be lar ger incr eases.
1242
Lower body 5-10 lb (2-4 kg) 5%
Stronger , mor e trained Upper body 5-10+ lb (2-4+ kg) 5%
Lower body 10-15+ lb (4-7+ kg) 5%
aThe strength and condi tioning professional will need to determine which of these two
subjectiv e categories appl ies to a speci fic athlete.
bThese load increases are appropriate for training programs using approximately 3 sets
of 5 to 10 repetitions. Note that the goal repetitions per set remain consta nt as the
loads ar e incr eased.
cA planned incr ease per week, but i t will be phase speci fic, could be lar ger incr eases.
Application of the Training Load and Repetition
Guidelines
Refer to the first scenario table on page 528  for a description of the scenario athletes.
Scenario A
Female collegiate basketball player
In-seasonScenario B
Male professional American football
lineman
Off-seasonScenario C
Male high school
cross country
runner
Preseason
PRIMARY IN-SEASON RESISTANCE
TRAINING GOAL
Strength/powerPRIMARY OFF-SEASON RESISTANCE
TRAINING GOAL
Hypertr ophyPRIMARY
PRESEASON
RESISTANCE
TRAINING GOAL
Muscular
endur ance
TESTING AND ASSIGNING LOADS
AND REPS
Influence of the training goals
Power ex ercises:  75%-85% of the 1RM;
3-5 repsa
Other cor e exercises:  >85% of the 1RM;
<6 reps
Assistance ex ercises:  limited to loads not
heavier than an 8RMTESTING AND ASSIGNING LOADS
AND REPS
Influence of the training goals
67%-80% of the 1RM; 8-12 r epsTESTING AND
ASSIGNING
LOADS AND
REPS
Influence of the
training goals
<67% of the 1RM;
>12 r eps
Number of goal reps
Power ex ercises:  3
Core exercises:  4
Assistance ex ercises:  8Number of goal reps
Core exercises:  10
Assistance ex ercises:  10Number of goal
reps
Core exercises:  12
Assistance
exercises:  15
Testing methods
3RM testing for power exercisesb
Push jerkTesting methods
1RM testing for core exercises
Deadl iftTesting methods
6RM testing for
core exercises
1243
Hang power clean
1RM testing for other core
exercisesc
Front squat
Incline bench pr ess
Seated r ow
8RM testing for assistance
exercisesd
Dumbbel l alternating curl
Triceps pushdownBack squati
Bench pr essi
Shoulder pr essi
10RM testing for new assistance
exercisesj
Step-up
Seated cal f (heel) r aise
Bent-over row
Shoulder shrugHexagonal barbel l
deadl ift
Lunge
Vertical chest pr ess
8RM testing for
new assistance
exercises
One-arm dumbbel l
row
Lateral shoulder
raise
Testing results
3RM hang power  115 lb (52 kg)
clean
Estimated 1RMe  124 lb (56 kg)
3RM push jerk  110 lb (50 kg)
Estimated 1RMe  118 lb (54 kg)
1RM f ront squat  185 lb (84 kg)
1RM incl ine bench  100 lb (45 kg)
press
1RM seated r ow  120 lb (54 kg)
8RM dumbbel l  25 lb (11 kg)
alternating curl
8RM triceps  50 lb (23 kg) pushdownTesting results
1RM deadl ift  650 lb (295 kg)
1RM back squat  675 lb (306 kg)
1RM bench pr ess  425 lb (193 kg)
1RM shoulder pr ess  255 lb (116 kg)
10RM step-up  205 lb (93 kg)
10RM seated cal f  155 lb (70 kg)
(heel) r aise
10RM bent -over row  215 lb (98 kg)
10RM shoulder  405 lb (184 kg) shrugTesting results
6RM hexagonal
barbel l deadl ift  
135 lb (61 kg)
Estimated
1RMe  160 lb
(73 kg)
6RM lunge  100
lb (45 kg)
Estimated
1RMe  120 lb
(54 kg)
6RM v ertical
chest  85 lb (39
kg) pr ess
Estimated
1RMe  100 lb
(45 kg)
8RM one- arm  
35 lb (16 kg)
dumbbel l row
8RM later al  15
lb (7 kg) shoulder
raise
Training loads
For power ex ercises:
Assign 75% of the estimated 1RM
Push jerk  90 lb (41 kg)
Hang power clean  95 lb (43 kg)
(All loads ar e rounded of f to the near est
5 lb.)
For other cor e exercises:
Assign 85% of the tested 1RM
Front squat  155 lb (70 kg)
Incline bench pr ess  85 lb (39 kg)
Seated r ow  120 lb (54 kg)Training loads
For cor e exercises:
Assign 70% of the tested 1RM
Deadl ift  490 lb (222 kg)
Back squat  505 lb (229 kg)
Bench pr ess  320 lb (145 kg)
Shoulder pr ess  190 lb (86 kg)
(All loads ar e rounded of f to the near est 5
lb.)
For assistance ex ercises:
Assign loads less than the loads f rom the
10RM testingg orTraining loads
For cor e exercises:
Assign <67% of
the estimated 1RM
For assistance
exercises:
Assign loads less
than the loads
from 8RM testingg
1244
(All loads ar e rounded of f to the near est
5 lb.)
For assistance ex ercises:
Assign loads less than the loads f rom
8RM testinggEqual to the loads used in the postseason
Leg (knee) curl  190 lb (86 kg)
Barbell biceps curl  115 lb (52 kg)
Lying triceps  125 lb (57 kg) extension
Weekly loading regimen  (power/cor e
exercises)f
Monda ys (“hea vy” push da y)
Assign the f ull load assignments
(calculated under “T raining loads”)
Wednesda ys (“hea vy” pul l day)
Assign the f ull load assignments
(calculated under “T raining loads”)
Fridays (“light” mix da y)
Assign only 80% of Monda y’s and
Wednesda y’s “hea vy da y” loads i f
exercises ar e repeatedhWeekly loading regimen  includes a
heavy and l ight emphasis on the lower
and upper body da ys
Monda ys (“Hea vy” lower body da y)
Tuesda ys (“Hea vy” upper body da y)
Thursda ys (“Light ” lower body da y)
Fridays (“Light ” upper body da y)
Assign 80%-85% of the hea vy da y loads
during the l ight da y training sessionsh
COMMENTS
aThe load and r ep assignments shown
for power ex ercises ar e based on
basketball, a mul tiple-ef fort ev ent, and
are not consistent wi th the %1RM–
repetition relationship .
bTo test f or power , an xRM (3RM)
protocol is used. Fr om the r esult, the
1RM is estimated and load assignments
are made b y calculating a per cent of the
estimated 1RM.
cThe athlete perf ormed these ex ercises
in the pr eseason, but to r aise the
accuracy of the load assignments f or the
in-season, the athlete wi ll be tested to
determine the curr ent 1RM.
dEven though some of these ex ercises
were part of the pr eseason pr ogram,
they al l require xRM testing because the
in-season goal r eps for these ex ercises is
8, rather than 10 f rom the pr evious
season.
eEstimate the 1RM using table 18.9 .
fThe loads f or the assistance ex ercises
remain constant thr oughout the week;
only the loads f or the power and other
core exercises change.
gPrescribing loads that ar e submaximal
to the xRM testing wi ll help athletes
avoid consistent tr aining to f ailure.COMMENTS
iThe athlete perf ormed these ex ercises in
the postseason, but to r aise the ac curacy
of the load assignments f or the of f-
season, the athlete wi ll be tested to
determine the curr ent 1RM.
jThe ex ercises shown her e wer e selected
as new ex ercises f or the of f-season
program and ther efore require 10RM
testing. The other assistance ex ercises
were carried o ver from the postseason
and do not r equire testing because the
load and r ep assignments wi ll be identical.
1245
hPrescribing hea vy and l ight loads wi th
the same ex ercises during the week ma y
help manage f atigue and pr event
consistently tr aining to f ailure. Even if
the athlete is able to , do not al low mor e
reps than the designated goal number
(power , 3; other cor e, 4).
1246
Step 6: Volume
Volume–load relates to the total amount of weight lifted in a training session,
and a set is a group of repetitions sequential ly performed before the athlete
stops to rest. Repetition-volume is the total number of repetitions performed
during a workout session, and volume–load is the total number of sets multiplied
by the number of repetitions per set, then multiplied by the weight lifted per
repetition. For example, the volume–load for 2 sets of 10 repetitions with 50
pounds (23 kg) would be expressed as 2 × 10 × 50 pounds or 1,000 pounds
(454 kg). (If different sets are performed with different amounts of weight, the
volumes per set are calculated and then added to obtain the total training
session v olume. )
In running exercise, the common (rep) volume measur e is distance. If an
intensi ty value is known or measur ed (e.g., running pace, which relates to
percent V̇O2max), total metabol ic energy cost (which is proportional to
mechanical work done) can be calculated. This value is compar able to volume–
load in resistan ce exercise. The same concepts are applicable to the number of
foot or hand contacts (volume) in plyometric exercise (note that the intensi ty is
not consider ed when counting  contacts but should be considered carefully by the
coach), the number of strokes (volume) in swimming or rowing, or the number
of thr ows or jumps (v olume) f or various sport activi ties.
Single Versus Multiple Sets
Single-set training may be appropriate for untrained individuals (50) or during
the first several months of training (61), but many studies indicate that higher
volumes are necessary to promote further gains in strength, especial ly for
intermediate and advanced resistance-tr ained athletes (126, 177, 182). For
example, performing 3 sets of 10 repetitions without going to failure enhances
strength better than one set to failure in 8 to 12 repetitions (90), although the
higher training volume with the use of 3 sets is a contributing factor (50, 162).
Therefore, an athlete who performs multiple sets from the initiation of their
resistance training program will increase muscular strength faster than with
single-set training (90). The strength and condi tioning professional cannot
expect, howev er, that an athlete will be able to successfully complete multiple
sets with full RM loads at fixed repetition schemes for every exercise in each
training session. Fatigue will affect the number of repetitions that can be
performed in later sets (116, 150), which is why a RIR approach may be
advantageous. It should also be noted that training to failure is not necessary for
optimal adaptations (36, 63, 137, 191). Refalo and colleagues (132) also
demonstr ated that the closer the proximity to failure, the greater the magni tude
1247
of fatigue over the subsequen t 24 hours, which should be carefully consider ed in
relation to the additional training planned for that period. As such, this also
highlights a limitation of the RIR approach, in that it has been clearly
demonstr ated that the further away from failure, the less accurate the RIR
approach is (6, 70).
Training Status
The training status of athlet es affects the volume they will be able to safely
tolerate. It is appropriate for an athlete to perform only 1 or 2 sets as a beginner
and to add sets as he or she becomes better trained. As the athlete adapts to a
consistent and well-designed program, more sets can be added gradual ly to
match the guidel ines associated wi th the giv en training goal.
Primary Resistance Training Goal
Training volume is directly based on the athlete’ s resistance training goal. Table
18.13  provides a summary of the guidel ines for the number of repetitions and
sets commonly associated with strength, power , hypertr ophy, and muscular
endur ance training programs. When programming weightl ifting exercises and
their derivatives, loads and the associated repetition schemes may vary from
other forms of power training, because weightl ifting pulling derivatives (i.e.,
those that exclude the catch phase) permi t loads greater than the 1RM
associated with the catching variation (21). In addition, reduced displacement
during some of these exercises (i.e., countermo vement shrug, hang pull, power
clean) also permi ts the performance of 6 repetitions without decreases in
velocity of power acr oss repetitions (113, 114) ( table 18.14 ).
TABLE 18.13  Volume Assignments Based on the Training Goal
Training
goalGoal repetitions Setsa
NOVICE INTERMEDIATE ADVANCED NOVICE INTERMEDIATE ADVANCED
Strength ≤6 ≤6 ≤6 1-3 ≥3 ≥3
Power:  b n/a 1-3 1-3 n/a 1-3 3-6
aThese assignments do not include w arm-up sets and t ypical ly apply to cor e exercises only .
bBased on weightl ifting movements (clean, snatch, jerk) and their derivatives. The load and repetition
assignments shown  for power in this table are not consis tent with the %1RM–r epetition relationship . In
nonexplosiv e movements, loads equal ing about 80% of the 1RM apply to the 2- to 5-repetition range.
Refer to the discussion of assigning per centages of the 1RM f or power tr aining f or further explanation.
cA higher number of repetitions may be performed without changes in velocity or power if the range of
motion and complexi ty is reduced (113, 114), or i f cluster sets ar e used.
dA low number of repetitions for hypertr ophy should be mixed with a higher number of sets (e.g., 10 sets
of 3 r epetitions).
Data f rom Fleck and Kr aemer (2014); Stone and O’B ryant (1987); T esch (1992).
1248
Single-ef fort
event
Multiple-
effort ev entn/a 3-6c3-6c n/a 1-3c3-6c
Hypertr ophy8-12 6-12 3-12 1-3 ≥3 ≥3d
Muscular
endur ance12-15 12-15 12-25 1-3 ≥3 ≥3
aThese assignments do not include w arm-up sets and t ypical ly apply to cor e exercises only .
bBased on weightl ifting movements (clean, snatch, jerk) and their derivatives. The load and repetition
assignments shown  for power in this table are not consis tent with the %1RM–r epetition relationship . In
nonexplosiv e movements, loads equal ing about 80% of the 1RM apply to the 2- to 5-repetition range.
Refer to the discussion of assigning per centages of the 1RM f or power tr aining f or further explanation.
cA higher number of repetitions may be performed without changes in velocity or power if the range of
motion and complexi ty is reduced (113, 114), or i f cluster sets ar e used.
dA low number of repetitions for hypertr ophy should be mixed with a higher number of sets (e.g., 10 sets
of 3 r epetitions).
Data f rom Fleck and Kr aemer (2014); Stone and O’B ryant (1987); T esch (1992).
Strength and Power
In classic resear ch, DeLorme (39) and DeLorme and Watkins (40) recommended
sets of 10 repetitions as ideal to increase muscular strength, although the
regimen was original ly developed for injury rehabi litation. Later, Berger (9, 10)
determined that 3 sets of 6 repetitions created maximal strength gains, at least
in the bench press and back squat exercises. Although Berger’s work seemed to
be conclusive, his subsequent resear ch (11) showed no significant difference
among 6 sets of a 2RM load, 3 sets of a 6RM load, and 3 sets of a 10RM load,
despite the differences in volume. Since then, the results of many other studies
have also been unable to support an exact set and repetition scheme to promote
maximal increases in strength; howev er, these inconclusiv e findings may be the
result of a mixture of relatively untrained and trained subjects, as well as varying
programming tactics.
When training an athlete for strength, assigning volume begins with an
examination of the optimal number of repetitions for maximal strength gains. As
discussed earlier (and shown in figure 18.10  and table 18.11 ), this appears to be
sets of 6 or fewer repetitions (at the corresponding RM load [≥85% 1RM]) for
core exercises (125, 182). Peterson and colleagues (125, 126) also highlighted a
dose–r esponse relationship based on the number of sets performed per muscle
group: 8 sets per muscle group elicited the greatest increases in strength, with
loads of 85% of the 1RM. More recently , similar conclusions were made by
Swinton and colleagues (182) based on the results of their meta- analysis of the
dose–r esponse to resistance training. Specific set guidel ines based on exercise
1249
type suggest that only 1 to 3 sets may be appropriate or necessary for
assistance ex ercises (2).
Volume assign ments for power training are typical ly lower than those for
strength training to maximiz e the quality of exercise. This reduction in volume
results from fewer goal repetitions and lighter loads (figure 18.10  and table
18.11 ) rather than the recommended number of sets (30, 68, 105). The
common guide line is 3 to 5 sets (after warm-up) for power exercises included in
a trained athlete’ s program (161).
TABLE 18.14  Weightlifting Exercises and Derivatives,
Including Recommended Intensities and Repetition Ranges
Catching
derivativesaLoad
(reps) Pulling derivativesbLoad (reps)Overhead
pressing
derivativesLoad
(reps)
Mid-thigh clean;
snatch60%-80%
1RM (2-5)Mid-thigh pul l;
countermo vement
shrug100%-140%
1RM (4-6c,d)Push pr ess 70%-90%
1RM (2-5)
Clean; snatch
from the knee70%-90%
1RM (2-5)Pull from the knee;
hang pul lPush jerk
Hang clean;
snatchcPull from the floor 80%-120%
1RM (2-6d)Split jerk
Clean; snatch Hang high pul l 45%-60% 1RM
(4-6)Behind the neck
push pr ess/jerkb
Jump shrug 30%-45% 1RM
(4-6)Behind the neck
split jerkb
aAll clean and snatch v ariations can be perf ormed wi th a partial squat (power) or f ull squat catch.
bThe deriv atives ma y be perf ormed wi th either a clean or snatch grip .
cSix reps can be perf ormed wi th no decr ease in v elocity or power between r eps (113, 114).
dHigher r eps ma y be perf ormed pr ovided that the technique of the ex ercise is maintained (91, 141).
Note:  Variations from mid-thigh and the knee can start with the barbel l resting on blocks, or with the
athlete holding the barbel l and lowering to the start position and briefly pausing. Currently, there is
minimal r esear ch comparing the kinetics or kinematics of these v ariations.
Adapted f rom Comf ort et al. (2023). Data f rom Kirksey and Stone (1998); S cala et al. (1987).
Hypertrophy
It is gener ally accepted that higher training volumes  are associated with
increases in muscular size (96, 139, 143). This is the result of both a moder ate
to highe r number of repetitions per set (8-12; see figure 18.10 and table 18.11)
and the comm only recomme nded 3 to 6 sets per exercise (91, 123). Howev er,
there does not appear to be a meaningf ul difference in training-induced
hypertr ophy of a specific muscle group between higher and lower frequencies
1250
when volume is matched (140). Furthermor e, it has been reported that there are
no differences in hypertr ophic adaptations following low (<60% 1RM) or high
(>60% 1RM) load training programs (141). Thus, it is important that strength
and conditioning professionals understand that heavy loads (i.e., >80% 1RM)
can be used to train muscle hypertr ophy rather than only maximal strength
characteristics. In fact, the use of heavier loads may target specific fibers and
higher threshold motor units (i.e., type II) to a greater extent than lighter loads
(82, 106, 158), which in turn may allow for greater force, rapid force, and power
output adaptat ions in future training blocks (187). Thus, it has been suggested
that using heavier loads to target hypertr ophic adaptations may be more
beneficial to strength and power athletes (53, 97). Howev er, it is also important
to adjust the number of sets and repetitions compar ed to traditional hypertr ophy
prescription; for example, strength and condi tioning  professionals could
prescribe 10 sets of 3 repetitions when using heavier loads compar ed to the
more traditional 3 sets of 10 repetitions typical ly prescribed when targeting
hypertr ophy. Moreover, caution should be taken when prescribing training in this
manner becaus e the volume–loads can be quite high and the time it may take to
complete a given exercise with proper rest periods between sets may lead to
length y training  sessions. Therefore, it is suggested that users do not implement
this set and r epetitions scheme wi th every ex ercise.
Muscular Endurance
Resistance training programs that emphasiz e muscular endur ance involve
performing many repetitions—12 or more—per set (160, 161). Despi te this
relatively high repetition assignment, the overall volume–load is not necessari ly
overly inflated since the loads lifted are lighter and fewer sets are performed,
commonly 2 or 3 per ex ercise.
Application of the Volum e Guidelines
Refer to the first scenario table on page 528  for a description of the scenario athletes.
Scenario A
Female collegiate basketball player
In-seasonScenario B
Male professional American
football lineman
Off-seasonScenario C
Male high school cross
country runner
Preseason
Power ex ercises  3 sets of 3 r eps
Other cor e  3 sets of 4 r eps ex ercises
Assistance  2 sets of 8 r eps ex ercises
(The number of sets does not include
warm-ups. )Core exercises  3 sets of 10
  r eps
Assistance  3 sets of 10
exercises  r eps
(The number of sets does not
include w arm-ups. )Core exercises  3 sets of 12
  r eps
Assistance  2 sets of 15
exercises   r eps
(The number of sets does not
include w arm-ups. )
1251
MONDAY
Push jerk  3  × 3a
Front squat  3  × 4
Incline bench pr ess  3  × 4
Triceps pushdown  3  × 8
WEDNESDAY
Hang power clean  3  × 3
Romanian deadl ift  3  × 4
Seated r ow  3  × 4
Dumbbel l  3  × 8 alternating curl
FRIDAY
Jump shrug  3  × 3
Rear leg–elev ated  3  × 4 split-squat
Pull-up  3  × 4
Single-leg sti ff-  3  × 4 legged
deadl iftLOWER BODY (MONDAY
AND THURSDAY)
Deadl ift  3  × 10
Back squat  3  × 10
Step-up  3  × 10
Leg (knee) curl  3  × 10
Seated cal f (heel)   3  × 10
raise
UPPER BODY (TUESDAY
AND FRIDAY)
Bench pr ess  3  × 10
Bent-over row  3  × 10
Shoulder pr ess  3  × 10
Barbell biceps curl  3  × 10
Shoulder shrug  3  × 10
Lying triceps  3  × 10
extension
Abdominal crunch  3  × 20WEDNESDAY
Hexagonal barbel l  3  × 12
deadl ift
Vertical chest pr ess  3  × 12
One-arm dumbbel l  3  × 12
row
Abdominal crunch  2  × 20
Machine back  2  × 15
extension
SATURDAY
Lunge  3  × 12
Lateral shoulder  3  × 12
raise
Single-leg sti ff-  3  × 12
legged deadl ift
Toe raise  3  × 12
(dorsi flexion)
Abdominal crunch  2  × 20
Machine back  2  × 15
extension
COMMENTS
aRepresented as sets  × repetitions her e
and in scenarios A, B , and C.
1252
Step 7: Rest Periods
The time dedicated to recovery between sets and exercises is called the rest
period  or inter-set rest. The length of the rest period between sets and
exercises is highly dependent  on the goal of training, the relative load lifted, and
the athlete’ s training status. (If the athlete is not in good physical condi tion, rest
periods ini tially ma y need to be longer than t ypical ly assigned. )
The amount of rest between sets is strongly related to load; the heavier the
loads lifted, the longer the rest periods the athlete will need between sets to
safely and successfully compl ete the prescribed subsequent sets and to promote
higher quality training. For example, training for muscu lar strength with 4RM
loads would likely require significantly longer rest periods between sets than
training for muscular endur ance in which lighter 15RM loads are lifted. Despi te
the relationship between training goals and the length of rest periods (e.g., long
rest periods for muscular strength training programs), not all exercises in a
resistance training program should be assigned the same rest periods. It is
important that the strength and condi tioning professiona l allocate rest periods
based on the relative load lifted and the amount of muscle mass involved in
each exercise. An example of this specificity is for an assistance exercise as part
of a muscular strength training program. Whereas a core exercise such as the
bench press may involve a 4RM load and a 4-minute rest period, an assistance
exercise such as the lateral shoulder raise may be performed with a 12RM load
and therefore require only a 1-minute rest period (even though 1-min rest
periods gener ally apply to a hypertr ophy training program). The recommended
rest period lengths for strength, power , hypertr ophy, and muscular endur ance
programs ar e shown in table 18.15 .
TABLE 18.15  Rest Period Length Assignments Based on the
Training Goal
Training goal* Rest period length
Strength 2-5 min
Power (single- and mul tiple-ef fort ev ent) 2-5 min
*Because there are occasions when the prescribed percentage of the 1RM for assistance exercises falls
outside the range associated with the training goal (e.g., ≥8RM loads are recommended for assistance
exercises as part of a muscular strength training program [2]), the strength and condi tioning professional
should examine the loads used for each exercise when assigning rest periods rather than gener ally
applying the guidel ines f or a tr aining goal.
Data from Fleck and Kraemer (2014); Gettman and Pollock (1981); Robinson et al. (1995); Scala et al.
(1987); S choenf eld et al. (2016); Stone and O’B ryant (1987); Stone et al. (2022); T esch et al. (1986).
1253
Hypertr ophy 2-3 min f or mul tijoint ex ercises; 60-90 s f or single-joint
exercises
Muscular endur ance ≤30 s
*Because there are occasions when the prescribed percentage of the 1RM for assistance exercises falls
outside the range associated with the training goal (e.g., ≥8RM loads are recommended for assistance
exercises as part of a muscular strength training program [2]), the strength and condi tioning professional
should examine the loads used for each exercise when assigning rest periods rather than gener ally
applying the guidel ines f or a tr aining goal.
Data from Fleck and Kraemer (2014); Gettman and Pollock (1981); Robinson et al. (1995); Scala et al.
(1987); S choenf eld et al. (2016); Stone and O’B ryant (1987); Stone et al. (2022); T esch et al. (1986).
Strength and Power
Training may enhance an athlete’ s ability to exercise with less rest, but athletes
who seek to perform maximal or near-maximal repetitions with a heavy load
usually need long rest period s, especial ly for lower body or all-body structur al
exercises (149, 193). For example, Robinson and colleagues (136) observ ed
that, in the back squat exercise, 3 minutes of inter-set rest resulted in greater
strength gains than a 30-sec ond rest period. Common guidel ines for rest period
length range 2 to 5 minutes (50, 162, 163) because these rest periods have
been shown to permi t greater volumes of work (194), allow for the use of
heavier loads (193), and result in greater maximal strength and power
adaptations (38, 136) compar ed to shorter r est interv als.
Hypertrophy
Athletes who are interested in gaining muscular size often use a short to
moder ate inter-set rest period (50). In fact, earlier reviews of hypertr ophy
training programs supported the use of shorter rest periods because it was
recommended that the athlet e begin the next set before full recovery has been
achiev ed (72, 184). Despi te this, the high metabol ic demand of exercises
involving large muscle groups merits consider ation (i.e., extra recovery time)
when rest period lengths are being assigned (138, 185). While rest periods for
hypertr ophy are typical ly 1.5 minutes or less, longer rest periods (i.e., 3 min)
have been shown to produced greater increases in muscle hypertr ophy
compar ed to those that were shorter (i.e., 1 min) (145). Longer rest periods may
allow athletes to train with a higher overall volume–load that may coincide with
the use of heavier training loads (62), which may in turn increase time under
tension and the stimulus for hypertr ophy. Thus, rest periods for training muscle
hypertr ophy may exist on a spectrum depending on the loads used and the
targeted mechanism of hypertr ophy (i.e., tension, metabol ic alterations, or
damage).
1254
Muscular Endurance
A muscular endur ance training program has very short rest periods, often less
than 30 seconds. This restriction of the recovery time is purposef ul; only a
minimal amount of rest is allowed when light loads are being lifted for many
repetitions. This type of program is designed to meet the guidel ine of the
specificity principle for muscular endur ance (2). Short rest periods are
characteristic of circuit training programs (58) in which it is common to alternate
exercises and l imit rest period lengths to 30 seconds or less.
1255
Conclusion
Well-designed programs are based on the application of sound principles during
each step of a process referred to as program design . The process begins with a
needs analysis to determine the specific demands of the sport and the training
status of the athlete. With this knowledge, appropriate exercises are selected,
and training frequency is establ ished. The order of exercises in the workout is
consider ed next, followed by load assignments and training volume choices
based on desired training outcomes. Deciding on the length of the rest periods is
the last step leading to the design of a sport-speci fic resistance training
program. A composi te view that includes all the program design variables (steps
1-7) f or the thr ee scenarios is shown in the scenario table.
Application of the Rest Period Guidelines
Refer to the first scenario table on page 528  for a description of the scenario athletes.
Scenario A
Female collegiate basketball player
In-seasonScenario B
Male professional American
football lineman
Off-seasonScenario C
Male high school cross
country runner
Preseason
Power and cor e  3 min ex ercises
Assistance ex ercises  60-90 sCore exercises  2-3 minutes
Assistance ex ercises  60-90
secondsCore exercises  30 s
Assistance ex ercises  20 sd
MONDAY
Push jerk  3 min
Front squat  3 min
Incline bench pr ess  3 min
Triceps pushdown  60-90 sa
WEDNESDAY
Hang power clean  3 min
Romanian deadl ift  3 min
Seated r ow  3 min
Dumbbel l  60-90 sa alternating curl
FRIDAY
Jump shrug  3 min
Rear leg–elev ated  3 min spl it-squat
Pull-up  3 min
Single-leg sti ff-  3 min legged
deadl iftLOWER BODY (MONDAY AND
THURSDAY)
Deadl ift  2-3 min
Back squat  2-3 min
Step-up  2-3 minb
Leg (knee) curl  60-90 s
Seated cal f (heel)   60-90 s
raise
UPPER BODY (TUESDAY AND
FRIDAY)
Bench pr ess  2-3 min
Bent-over row  60-90 s
Shoulder pr ess  2-3 min
Barbell biceps curl  60-90 s
Shoulder shrug  60-90 s
Lying triceps  60-90 s
extension
Abdominal crunch  20 scWEDNESDAY
Hexagonal barbel l  30 s
deadl ift
Vertical chest pr ess  30 s
One-arm dumbbel l  30 s
row
Abdominal crunch  ≤20 s
Machine back  ≤20 s
extension
SATURDAY
Lunge  30 s
Lateral shoulder  30 s
raise
Single-leg sti ff-  30 s
legged deadl ift
Toe raise   30 s
(dorsi flexion)
Abdominal crunch  ≤20 s
1256
Machine back  ≤20 s
extension
COMMENTS
aDespi te following a str ength/power
training pr ogram, the athlete is
performing sets of 8 r eps in this
exercise, a v olume assignment f or
hypertr ophy training. Ther efore, the
length of the r est period should be 60-
90 s. The r est period f or the single-
joint ex ercises is sl ightly shorter
because f ewer muscles ar e involved.COMMENTS
bThis ex ercise is classi fied as an
assistance ex ercise and, l ike the
others, could be assigned a 60-
90 s r est period. Despi te this,
the step-up is a uni lateral
exercise that r equires mor e time
for completion of each set.
Therefore, a longer r est period is
provided.
cAlthough this athlete is tr aining
for hypertr ophy, he is perf orming
sets of 20 r eps in this ex ercise, a
volume assignment f or muscular
endur ance. Ther efore, the length
of the r est period should be ≤30
s.COMMENTS
dDespi te the short r est
periods used during a
muscular endur ance phase,
shorter r est periods can be
used f or assistance ex ercises
due to a decr eased
neuromuscular demand
compar ed to cor e exercises.
Application of All Program Design Variables: Steps
1-7
Refer to the first scenario table on page 528  for a description of the scenario athletes.
Scenario A
Female collegiate
basketball player
In-seasonScenario B
Male professional American football
lineman
Off-seasonScenario C
Male high school cross
country runner
Preseason
MONDAY (HEAVY PUSH
DAY)
Push jerka 3 × 3 @ 90 lb (41
kg)
Front squata 3 × 4 @ 155 lb
(70 kg)
Incline bench pr essa 3 × 4 @
85 lb (39 kg)
Triceps pushdownb 3 × 8 @ 40
lb (18 kg)
WEDNESDAY (HEAVY PULL
DAY)
Hang power cleana 3 × 3 @ 95
lb (43 kg)
Romanian deadl ifta 3 × 4 @
155 lb (70 kg)LOWER BODY (MONDAY AND
THURSDAY)d
Deadl ifta 3 × 10 @ 345 lb (156 kg)
Back squata 3 × 10 @ 355 lb (161 kg)
Step-upa 3 × 10 @ 190 lb (86 kg)
Leg (knee) curlb 3 × 10 @ 175 lb (79 kg)
Seated cal f (heel) r aiseb 3 × 10 @ 145 lb (66
kg)
UPPER BODY (TUESDAY AND FRIDAY)d
Bench pr essa 3 × 10 @ 225 lb (102 kg)
Bent-over rowa 3 × 10 @ 205 lb (93 kg)
Shoulder pr essa 3 × 10 @ 135 lb (61 kg)
Barbell biceps curlb 3 × 10 @ 105 lb (48 kg)
Shoulder shrugb 3 × 10 @ 375 lb (170 kg)
Lying triceps extensionb 3 × 10 @ 110 lb (50
kg)WEDNESDAY
Hexagonal barbel l
deadl ifte 3 × 12 @ 90 lb
(41 kg)
Vertical chest pr esse 3
× 12 @ 55 lb (25 kg)
One-arm dumbbel l rowe
3 × 12 @ 20 lb (9 kg)
Abdominal crunchf 3 ×
20
Machine back extensionf
3 × 15 @ 45 lb (20 kg)
SATURDAY
Lungee 3 × 12 @ 65 lb
(29 kg)
Lateral shoulder r aisef 3
× 12 @ 10 lb (5 kg)
1257
Seated r owa 3 × 4 @ 120 lb
(54 kg)
Dumbbel l alternating curlb 3 ×
8 @ 20 lb (9 kg)
FRIDAY (LIGHT MIX DAY)
Jump shruga 3 × 3 @ 35 lb
(16 kg)c
Rear leg–elev ated spl it-squata
3 × 4 @ 75 lb (34 kg)
Pull-upa 3 × 4 @ body weight
Single-leg sti ff-legged deadl ift
3 × 4 @ 35 lb (16 kg)aAbdominal crunche 3 × 20 Single-leg sti ff-legged
deadl ifte 3 × 12 10 lb (5
kg)
Toe raise (dorsi flexion)f
3 × 12 @ 20 lb (9 kg)
Abdominal crunchf 3 ×
20
Machine back extensionf
3 × 15 @ 40 lb (18 kg)
COMMENTS
a3 min r est period
b60-90 s r est period
cLoad based on appr oximately
30% of the hang power clean
estimated 1RMCOMMENTS
d80%-85% of the loads used on Monda y and
Tuesda y should be pr escribed f or the tr aining
sessions on Thursda y and Frida y, respectiv ely
e30 s r est periodCOMMENTS
f20 second r est period
KEY TERMS
1-repetition maximum (1RM)
2-for-2 rule
agonist
antagonist
assistance ex ercise
circuit training
compound set
core exercise
exercise history
exercise or der
exercise selection
exercise technique experience
goal r epetitions
individual ization
injury analysis
intensi ty
inter-set rest
load
mechanical work
microdosing
movement analysis
1258
multijoint ex ercise
multiple-RM (xRM)
muscle balance
needs analysis
overload
physiological analysis
power ex ercise
profile
program design
progression
rating of per ceived ex ertion (RPE)
repetition maximum (RM)
repetition-volume
repetitions
repetitions in r eserv e (RIR)
rest period
reversibility
SAID
set
set-repetition best (SRB)
single-joint ex ercise
specificity
split routine
structur al exercise
superset
training backgr ound
training f requency
training status
variation
velocity
volume
volume–load
volume–load displacement
STUDY QUESTIONS
  1.  A basketball coach informs you that one of her athletes needs to increase
her vertical jump performanc e. In addition to some ballistic and plyometric
training, which of the following resistance training exercises are most likely
to enhance the athlete’ s vertical jump perf ormance?
1259