# Section 19.1

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 19: Program Design and Technique for Plyometric Training

**Section:** 19.1 -- Plyometric Mechanics and Physiology

**PDF Pages:** 1260--1275

CHAPTER  19
PROGRAM DESIGN AND
TECHNIQUE FOR
PLYOMETRIC TRAINING
Chris A. Bailey, PhD, and Clive Brewer, MSc
The authors would like to acknowledge the significant contributions of David H. Potach
and Donald A. Chu to this chapter .
After completing this chapter, you will be able to
explain the ph ysiology of ply ometric ex ercise;
identi fy the phases of the str etch-shortening cy cle;
identi fy the components of a ply ometric tr aining pr ogram;
design a saf e and ef fective plyometric tr aining pr ogram;
prescribe ef fective plyometric ex ercise pr ogressions and
regressions f or a v ariety of individuals;
recommend pr oper equipment f or use during ply ometric
exercise; and
teach corr ect ex ecution of lower and upper body ply ometric
exercises.
Plyometric exercise  refers to those  activities that enable a muscle
to reach maximal force in the shortest possible time. Plyometric  is a
1260
combination of Greek words that literally means to increase
measur ement (plio = more; metric  = measur e) (67). Practical ly
defined, plyometric exercise is a quick, powerf ul movement using a
prestretch, or countermo vement, that involves the stretch-
shortening cycle (SSC) (64). Furthermor e, plyometric exercises are
typical ly classified as being either ballistic or rebounding. Ballistic
exercises  are those that minimal ly include contributions from the
neuromuscular component of the SSC (e.g., squat jump, medicine
ball overhead throw). In contrast, rebound exercises  are those
that require physiomechanical SSC contributions (e.g., drop jumps or
repeat counte rmovement jumps). This classification is important
because it determines the specific neuromuscular and mechanical
demands of each exercise (37). The purpose of plyometric exercise
is to increase the power of subsequent movements by using both
the natural elastic component s of muscle and tendon and the stretch
reflex. To effectively use plyometrics as part of a training program, it
is important to understand the mechanics and physiology of
plyometric exercise, the principles of plyometric training program
design, and the methods of safely and effectively performing specific
plyometric ex ercises.
1261
Plyometric Mechanics and Physiology
Functional movements and athletic success depend on both the
proper function of all active muscles and the velocity at which these
muscular forces are used. The term used to define this force–velocity
relationship is power . When properly implemented, plyometric
training consistently improves an athlete’ s ability to produce muscle
force and power (34, 59). This enhancement affects the impulse an
athlete can gener ate. Impuls e, defined as the integr al of force over
time, directly influences an athlete’ s performance by changing
momentum. Specifically, an increased impulse leads to greater
momentum, which allows athletes to accelerate and deceler ate more
effectively. These rapid changes in velocity are crucial performance
qualities across a wide range of sports. These increases are best
explained by two proposed models: mechanical and
neurophysiological (64).
Mechanical Model of Plyometric Exercise
In the mechanical model, elastic energy in the musculotendinous
components is increased with a rapid stretch and then stored (3, 16,
35). When this movement is immediately followed by a concentric
muscle action,  the stored elastic energy is released, increasing the
total force production (3, 16, 35). Of the mechanical model’s many
elements, it is the series elastic component (SEC) that is the
workhorse of plyometric exercise. While the SEC includes some
muscular components, it is the tendons that consti tute the majori ty
of the SEC. When the musculotendinous unit is stretched, as in an
eccentric muscle action, the SEC acts as a spring and is lengthened;
as it lengthe ns, elastic energy is stored and released with
subsequent concentric actions. Figure 19.1 provides a schematic
illustration of the components of the S SC.
1262
FIGURE 19.1 Mechanical mode l of skeletal muscle function. The series elastic component
(SEC), when stretched, stores elastic energy that increases the force produced. The
contractile compone nt (CC) (i.e., actin, myosin, and crossbridges) is the primary source of
muscle force during concentric muscle action. The parallel elastic compone nt (PEC) (i.e.,
epimysium, perim ysium, endom ysium , and sarcolemma) exerts a passive force with
unstimulated muscle str etch.
Adapted from Albert (1995).
Neurophysiological Model of Plyometric
Exercise
The neurophysiological mode l involves the potentiation  (change in
the force–velocity characteristics of the muscle’ s contractile
components caused by stretch [25]) of the concentric muscle action
by use of the stretch reflex (9-12). The stretch reflex  is the body’s
involuntary response to an external stimulus that stretches the
muscles (31, 49). This reflexiv e component of plyometric exercise is
primari ly composed of muscle spindle activity. Muscle spindles  are
proprioceptiv e organs that are sensitive to the rate and magnitude of
a stretch; when a quick stretch is detected, muscular activity
reflexiv ely increases (31, 49). During plyometric exercises, the
muscle spindles are stimulate d by a rapid stretch, causing a reflexiv e
muscle action. The series elastic component (SEC)  and parallel
elastic comp onent (PEC)  are two elastic structur es that can be
stretched within the muscle during plyometric exercises. The SEC
includes tendons and muscle fiber crossbridges. The PEC contains
1263
collagenous structur es (e.g., fascicular membr anes), which provide
stability and protection to musculatur e. This reflexiv e response
potentiates, or increases, the activity in the agonist muscle, thereby
increasing the force the muscle produces (9-12, 41). As in the
mechanical model, if a concentric muscle action does not
immediately follow a stretch (i.e., if there is too long a time between
stretch and concentric action  or movement over too large a range),
the potentiating abi lity of the str etch r eflex is negated.
Enhancements in measur ement techniques using force platforms
(kinetic data), motion captur e (kinematic data), and
electr omyography (motor unit activation) have demonstr ated that
the mechanical and neurophysiological models contribu te to the
increased production of force seen during plyometric exercise (3, 9-
12, 16, 35, 41). For example, Jarvis and colleagues (37) have
reported that rebound activities elicit enhanced neurophysiological
contributions when compar ed to ballistic activities and that increased
mechanical outputs exhibi ted during high-impact plyometrics are
largely the result of mechanical factors associated with potential
energy production (i.e. , mechanical contributions).
Stretch-Shortening  Cycle
The stretch-shortening cycle (SSC)  employs the energy storage
capabi lities of the SEC and stimulation of the stretch reflex to
facilitate a maximal increase in muscle recruitment over a minimal
amount of time. The SSC involves three distinct phases as shown in
table 19.1. While the table delineates the SSC’s individual mechanical
and neurophysiological events during each phase, it is important to
remember that all the events listed do not necessari ly occur within
the given phase. That is, some of the events may last longer  or may
require less time than allowed in the given phase. Phase I is the
eccentric phase, which is the time from resting position to the
bottom of the countermo vement that involves preloading the agonist
muscle group or groups. During this phase, the SEC stores elastic
energy, and the muscle spindles are stimulated. As the muscle
1264
spindles are stretched, they send a signal to the ventral root of the
spinal cor d via the t ype Ia afferent nerv e fibers.
TABLE 19.1  Stretch-Shortening Cycle
Phase Action Physiological event
I—Eccentric Stretch of the agonist
muscleElastic ener gy is stor ed in the series elastic
component.
Muscle spindles ar e stimulated.
II—
AmortizationPause between phases I
and IIIType Ia afferent nerv es synapse wi th alpha
motor neur ons.
Alpha motor neur ons tr ansmi t signals to
agonist muscle gr oup.
III—
ConcentricShortening of agonist
muscle fibersElastic ener gy is r eleased f rom the series
elastic component.
Alpha motor neur ons stimulate the agonist
muscle gr oup.
To visual ize the eccentric phase, consider a countermo vement
vertical jump. Stretch reflex latency  (the time from reflex
stimulation to the beginning of agonist muscle activity) largely
depends on nerve conduction velocities and therefore increases with
greater distances from the spinal cord (i.e., longer nerves) (40, 42,
44, 54). Quadriceps and gastrocnemius stretch reflexes typical ly
range from 20 to 30 milliseconds and from 30 to 45 milliseconds,
respectiv ely (40, 53).
Phase II is the time between  the eccentric and concentric phases
and is termed the amortization  (or coupling ) phase . This is the
time from the end of the eccentric phase to the initiation of the
concentric muscle action. There is a delay between the eccentric and
concentric muscle actions during which type Ia afferent nerves
synapse with the alpha motor neurons in the ventral root of the
spinal cord. The alpha motor neurons then transmi t signals to the
agonist muscle  group. This phase of the SSC is perhaps the most
crucial in allowing greater power production; its duration must be
kept short. If the amortization phase lasts too long, the energy
1265
stored during the eccentric phase dissipates as heat, and the stretch
reflex will not increase muscle activity during the upcoming
concentric phase (14). Resear ch has shown that increasing time in
the amortization phase results in increases in elastic energy lost in
the bench press compar ed to no delay between eccentric and
concentric phases (ener gy losses were 0.35 s = 25%, 0.9 s = 52%,
1 s = 55%, and 1.5 s = 70%) (66). Consider the countermo vement
vertical jump mentioned earlier. Once the countermo vement has
stopped, the amortization phase has begun. As soon as movement
begins again, the amortization phase has ended.
The concentric phase , phase III, is the body’s response to the
eccentric and amortization phases. In this phase, the energy stored
in the SEC during the eccentric phase either is used to increase the
force of the subsequent movement or is dissipated as heat. This
stored elastic energy increases the force produced during the
concentric phase movement beyond that of an isolated concentric
muscle action  (15, 58). In addition, the alpha motor neurons
stimulate the agonist muscle group, resulting in a reflexiv e
concentric muscle action (i.e., the stretch reflex). The efficiency of
these subsystems is essential to the proper performance of
plyometric exercises. Again, visual ize the vertical jump. As soon as
movement begins in an upward direction, the amortization phase
has ended, and the concentric phase of the SSC has begun. In this
example, one of the agonist muscles is the quadriceps (rectus
femoris, vastus lateralis, vastus medial is, vastus intermedius). During
the countermo vement, the quadriceps under goes a rapid stretch
(eccentric phase); there is a delay in movement (amortization
phase), and then the muscle concentrical ly extends the knee,
allowing the athlete to push of f the gr ound (concentric phase).
The rate of musculotendinous stretch is vital to plyometric
exercise (41). This can be influenced by the type of plyometric
activity and the ground contact technique (13). A high stretch rate
results in greater muscle recruitment and activity during the SSC
concentric phase. The importance of the stretch rate may be
1266
illustrated by three different vertical jump tests: a static squat jump,
a countermo vement jump, and an approach jump with several steps.
As the rate of stretch increases, an athlete’ s absolute performance in
these tests improves; the static squat jump results in the lowest
jump height, and the approach jump results in the highest. The
static squat jump requires the athlete to get into a squat ting position
(i.e., 90-degr ee hip flexion and 90-degr ee knee flexion) followed by
a jump up. This jump does not use stored elastic energy and is too
slow to allow potentiation from the stretch reflex because there is
essential ly no eccentric phase. The countermo vement jump uses a
rapid eccentric element (i.e., a partial squat) followed immediately
by rapid concentr ic muscle activity (i.e., a jump up). The rapid
eccentric phase  allows the athlete to store and use elastic energy in
the stretched musculotendinous unit and stimulates the stretch
reflex, thereby potentiating muscle activity (7, 33). The approach
(one- or two-step) jump uses an even quicker, more forceful
eccentric phase than the countermo vement jump; the increased rate
of stretch during the eccentric phase allows a further increase in
vertical jump height (4 , 6, 8, 29).
The type of ground contact (and, hence, the rate of stretch and
duration of the amortization  phase, which affects the return of
elastic energy) is influenced by the technique used during rebound
actions. Cappa and Behm (13) demonstr ated that flat-foot landing
techniques resulted in significantly longer ground contact times in
comparison to active forefoot landings (which also had a 45%
greater rate of force production) due to the increased contribution of
neuromuscular and elastic force production. Strength and
condi tioning professionals should note that technique is therefore an
essential factor in the effectiveness of the SSC, rate of force
development, and subsequent kinematic v ariables of the mo vement.
Strength and conditioning professionals may consider
that the duration of the amortization phase may lead to
activities that promote different movement
1267
characteristics. To this end, Schmidtbleicher (56)
categorized plyometric activities as either slow SSC
(>0.25 s) or fast SSC (<0.25 s), depending on their
ground contact time.
As well as enhancing nonvoluntary neuromuscular outputs, the
SSC serves a protectiv e function within the myotendinous structur es
of the musculosk eletal system. The Golgi tendon organ is
encapsulated within the serial components of the myotendinous
junction. This is a proprioceptiv e mechanism that detec ts the rate
and magni tude of force being applied to the respectiv e tendon and
will cause an inverse stretch reflex to occur past a tensile threshold,
which immediately inhibi ts the excitatory signal through the motor
neuron to the motor unit. Progressive plyometric training serves to
desensi tize the Golgi tendon organ, thus increasing the excitability
potential of the motor uni t for incr eased perf ormance gains.
The SSC combines mech anical and neurophysiological
mechanisms and is the basis of plyometric exercise. A
rapid eccent ric muscle action stimulates the stretch
reflex and storage of elastic energy, which results  in an
increase in the force produced during the subse quent
concentric action.
1268
Program Design
Plyometric exercise prescription is similar to resistance and aerobic
exercise prescriptions—mode, intensi ty, frequency , duration, volume,
density, technique development and progression, and a warm-up
period must all be dynamic variables incorpor ated in the design of a
sound plyometric training program. Unfortunately , there is minimal
resear ch demar cating optimal program variables for the design of
plyometric exercise programs. Therefore, when prescribing
plyometric exercise, strength  and condi tioning professionals must
rely on the available resear ch, practical experience, and the
increasing availability of motion captur e and force plate technology
to guide decision making.
Needs Analysis
To properly design a plyometric training program, the strength and
condi tioning professional must analyz e the needs of the athlete by
evaluating his or her sport, sport position, anthropometry , and
training status. Each sport and position has its own unique
requirements; some requirements are unique because of the
movements involved, while others have distinctiv e injury profiles and
risks. The anthropometry of the athlete is important, because
heavier athletes face exponential ly higher loads in gravity-assisted
exercises than athletes with a lower mass; therefore, athletes’ body
weight and their strength relative to their body weight become
important consider ations. Further , each athlete possesses a unique
training status ; some may be new to training and have never
performed plyometric exercises, while others may have been injured.
Each of these populations of athletes requires a different approach
to plyometric training. By understanding each sport’s individual
requirements, the positions within the sport, and the needs of each
athlete, the strength and condi tioning professional is better able to
design a saf e, effective plyometric tr aining pr ogram.
1269
Mode
The mode of plyometric training is determined by the body region
performing the given exercise. For example, a single-leg hop is a
lower body rebounding plyometric exercise, while a two-hand
kneeling medicine ball throw is an upper body exercise that is
performed ballistical ly. Modes of plyometric exercise are discussed in
the par agraphs that f ollow.
Lower Body Plyometrics
Lower body plyometrics are appropriate for virtual ly any athlete and
any sport or rehabi litation context. Because most sports require
athletes to produce a maximal amount of muscular force in a short
amount of time, lower body plyometrics provide an ideal and highly
variable training stimulus that positively transfers training benefi ts to
a variety of sports. For example, sprinters require sagittal plane
movements, whereas most other sports require comb inations of
sagittal plane, frontal plane, and occasional transverse plane
movements to be successful in competi tion. Demand can differ
within positions in each sport: A middle blocker in volleyball may
require predominantly lateral and vertical movements, whereas an
outside hitter may have an increased emphasis on horizontal into
vertical movements. American footbal l, basebal l, soccer, and
basketball athletes must make quick, powerf ul movements and
changes of direction in all planes to compete successfully. A
basketball center is an example of an athlete who would benefi t
greatly from a plyometric training program, because the center is
required to jump repeatedly for rebounds. To be successful, the
center must be able to out-jump the opposing center in order to
rebound more loose balls. Conversely , center backs in soccer may
benefi t from more ballistic actions, because they will typical ly
accelerate into a jump f rom a running start into a single-f oot tak eoff.
Lower body plyometric training also gives the ability to produce
more force in a shorter amount of time, thereby allowing a higher
jump. This should also guide the strength and condi tioning
1270
professional to consider that plyometric session design is not limited
to actions purely in the sagittal plane, and the transition from one
foot to two feet, two feet to one foot, one foot to the other, or one
leg to the same leg are often as important for performance
enhancement as two-f ooted actions.
Aerobic endur ance athletes can also benefi t from participation in a
plyometric training program, because repetitive efforts that have
neurophysiological and mechanical properties to optimiz e movement
efficiency improve running and cycling econom y by allowing muscles
to produce mor e force with less ener gy.
The various lower body plyometric drills have differing intensi ty
levels and directional movements. The types of lower body
plyometric drills include singular and repetitive actions (e.g.,
bounds ) using one foot (hop) or both feet (jump ), which  may be
transitional, in-place, or involve objects such as a box (e.g., a box
jump ) or hur dle. S ee table 19.2  for a description of these dri lls.
TABLE 19.2  Lower Body Plyometric Drills
Type Description
Hops Takeoff from one f oot and landing on the same f oot. V olume is ei ther
measur ed by distance tr aveled or number of f oot contacts. This mo vement
develops ac celeration and deceler ation capabi lities in a single l imb, with
intensi ty defined b y displacement v elocity and v olume defined b y foot
contacts. These dri lls ma y be singular (bal listic hop) that is in place or
horizontal, or r eactiv e (mul tiple r epetitive actions f or height or distance).
Bounds Takeoff from one f oot and landing, or tr ansitioning thr ough, to the other f oot.
Depending on the tr aining status of the athlete (r ehab vs. perf ormance), these
drills ma y be singular (bal listic bound) or r eactiv e (mul tiple r epetitive actions
with alternating gr ound contact). B ounds ma y result in gr eater horiz ontal
velocity than hops and jumps and ther efore are ideal f or dev eloping
accelerations and deceler ations wi th bilateral weight tr ansfer. Intensi ty is
defined b y the horiz ontal v elocity of the action. V olume is t ypical ly measur ed
by distance but ma y be thr ough the number of r epetitions perf ormed.
Jumps Takeoff and landing wi th two f eet that ma y be horiz ontal or v ertical in natur e.
The height or length of a jump determines the intensi ty of the action. V olume
is determined b y the number of f oot contacts. Jumps ma y be in place, ha ve
1271
Type Description
multiple r epetitive actions, in volve equipment such as bo xes or hur dles, or
consist of a combination of these at tributes.
Depth
jumps
and
depth
hopsDepth jumps and hops (“shock” actions) use gr avity and the athlete’ s weight
to incr ease ex ercise intensi ty. The athlete assumes a posi tion on a bo x, steps
off, lands, and immediately tr ansitions v ertical ly, horiz ontally, later ally, or to
another bo x. The height of the bo x determines the intensi ty of the action, and
the volume is determined b y the number of f oot contacts. R epetitive jumps
onto bo xes or o ver barriers ma y be added in sequence.
Upper Body Plyometrics
Rapid, powerf ul upper body movements are requisi tes for several
sports and activities, including basebal l, softbal l, tennis, golf, and
throws in track and field (i.e., the shot put, discus, and javelin). For
example, an elite basebal l pitcher routinely throws a basebal l at 80
to 100 miles per hour (129-1 61 km/h). It is important to understand
that to reach velocities of this magni tude, throwing actions have to
be initiated with the legs and require hip–shoulder separ ation and
high rotational velocities in the hip and thoracic spine (e.g., a
basebal l pitcher’s shoulder joint must move at more than 6,000
degrees per s) (23, 26, 27, 53). Plyometric training of the shoulder
joint may not only increase pitching velocity, but it also may prevent
injury to the shoulder and elbow joints. Such upper body actions
need to be linked with impulses gener ated through segmental
actions initiated in the lower body if they are to be effective in the
transfer to perf ormance.
Plyometric drills for the upper  body are not used as often as those
for the lower body and have been studied less extensiv ely, but they
are nonetheless essential to athletes who require upper body power
(52). Plyometrics for the upper body (e.g., throws  and slams ) are
typical ly bal listic in natur e (table 19.3 ).
TABLE 19.3  Upper Body Plyometric Drills
Type Description
1272
Type Description
Throws Single or both arms pr ojecting a medicine bal l or other external weight ei ther
horizontally or v ertical ly. Progressions include incr eased mass of the implement,
increased tar get distance, or change of emphasis in complexi ty of the mo vement
(e.g., kneel ing vs. standing thr ow).
Slams Gener ally, a double- arm mo vement f orcefully bringing a medicine bal l or other
implement dir ectly down to the gr ound. Pr ogressions include incr eased mass of
the medicine bal l or incr eased tar get velocity of the medicine bal l.
Pull Ballistical ly pul ling the body in a v ertical dir ection such as an explosiv e supine
row or a pul l-up. The posi tion of the center of mass and r ange of action wi ll be
determined b y the athlete’ s strength and mo vement competence.
Push Pressing the body a way from the gr ound in a pr one posi tion. Pr ogressions need
to consider the athlete’ s relative strength lev els and include incorpor ating shock
methodology wi th varying depth of dr op-to-gr ound contact, decr easing fl ight
time to incr ease mo vement v elocity, or incr easing complexi ty through later al or
overhead mo vements.
Note:  Although these are classified as upper body movements, some throws and slams are
total body in nature. If the upper body is not isolated, many actions are initiated with the
hips, knees, and ankles and a postural force-mul tiplication enables the object to be
projected from the upper body. This is entirely appropriate if this is a desired objectiv e
within the athlete’ s program.
Trunk Plyometrics
In general, it is difficult to perform true plyometric drills that directly
target trunk musculatur e (table 19.4) because all the requisi te
plyometric elements may not be present. As with upper body
plyometric exercises, after the eccentric phase of the SSC there is
likely some storage of elastic energy during a plyometric (so to
speak) trunk dri ll.
TABLE 19.4  Trunk Plyometric Drills
Type Description
Lower body
anchor edEither suspended in a pr one posi tion or in a tr aditional si t-up posi tion wi th
the feet anchor ed so that the upper body is f ree to mo ve. Mo vements can
be progressed b y incorpor ating or incr easing an external r esistance or
movement v elocity.
1273
Type Description
Upper body
anchor edLying supine, holding a fix ed object or a partner ’s legs, whi le the lower body
is free to mo ve. Mo vements can be pr ogressed b y incorpor ating or
increasing external r esistance, mo vement v elocity, or plane of motion (e.g. ,
increased tr ansverse plane in volvement is mor e complex than sagi ttal plane
only).
Throws Forcefully projecting a medicine bal l or other external weight in a speci fied
direction. The mass of the implement wi ll influence the r esultant mo vement
velocity and should be consider ed in r espect to the mass– velocity–
momentum equation and the f orce production capabi lity of the athlete.
Exercises for the trunk may be performed ballistical ly provided
that movement modifications are made. Specifically, the exercise
movement must be shorter and quicker to allow stimulation and use
of the stretch reflex. The relatively large range of motion and the
time needed to complete the movement do not permi t reflexiv e
potentiation of the abdominal muscles. The exercises can be
modified to decrease both the range of motion and time, thereby
allowing the agonist muscles to be potentiated.
Intensity
Plyometric intensi ty refers to the stress placed on muscles,
connectiv e tissues, and joints during an exercise. It is primari ly
determined by the type of drill performed, technique used, and
arrangement of equipment. Additional ly, it is important to consider
the complexi ty of the movement when assessing intensi ty. For
example, multiple hurdle hops in a straight line can involve higher
linear speeds at a relatively lower intensi ty. Howev er, if the same
hurdles are arranged in a squar e that requires the athlete to change
direction with each hop, the intensi ty will be significantly higher . This
increase in intensi ty occurs because athletes must deceler ate their
momentum before each direction change. They must then use the
plyometric response to propel themselv es in a new direction. As a
result, both the intensi ty of the drill and the ground conta ct time can
increase substantial ly when dir ectional changes ar e incorpor ated.
1274
The intensi ty of plyometric drills is, therefore, multifactorial and
should be consider ed on a continuum from low to high intensi ty
depending on a number of planning factors. For example, skips are
consider ed a relatively low-intensi ty drill, while depth jumps  are
consider ed a higher intensi ty drill because they place a higher stress
on the muscles and joints ( figure 19.2 ).
FIGURE 19.2  Continuum of ply ometric ex ercises.
In addition to the type of drill, several other factors also affect
plyometric intensi ty (table 19.5). Generally, as intensi ty increases,
volume should decrease (57). Because the intensi ty of plyometric
exercise can vary significantly , careful consider ation must be given to
choosing pr oper dri lls during a speci fic training cy cle.
TABLE 19.5  Factors Affecting the Prescribed
Intensity of Lower Body Plyometric Drills
Factor Effect
Points of
contactThe gr ound r eaction f orce during single-leg lower body ply ometric dri lls
places mor e stress on an extr emity’s muscles, connectiv e tissues, and
joints than during double-leg ply ometric dri lls.
Speed Greater horiz ontal v elocity incr eases the intensi ty of the dri ll.
Technique Ankle, knee, and hip sti ffness and the abi lity to maintain postur al
alignment influence gr ound contact time, gr ound r eactional f orces,
eccentric muscle actions, and injury risk.
Strength Higher lev els of str ength–to–body weight r educe the r elative intensi ty of
a drill wher e mass is ac celerated tow ard the gr ound b y gravity (i.e. , any
1275