# Section 19.2

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 19: Program Design and Technique for Plyometric Training

**Section:** 19.2 -- Plyometric Program Design

**PDF Pages:** 1276--1310

Factor Effect
form of r eactiv e plyometric dri ll).
Directional
changeChanging dir ection r equires deceler ation and r edirected ac celeration of
the athlete’ s center of mass. This incr eases the impulse r equired in the
action and t ypical ly requires incr eased gr ound contact time.
Vertical
component of
the dri llThe higher the body ’s center of gr avity, the gr eater the f orce on landing.
Mass The gr eater the athlete’ s body weight, the mor e stress is placed on
muscles, connectiv e tissues, and joints. External load in the f orm of
bars, weight v ests, ankle weights, and wrist weights can be added to
the body to incr ease a dri ll’s intensi ty.
Much like exercise selection for resistance training, specific
consider ation should be given to the muscle actions that are
incorpor ated into each plyometric exercise because this will alter the
muscle activation and resulting intensi ty. Reactiv e exercises require
athletes to reduce forces in a landing impact prior to propelling
themselv es in the desired direction, while ballistic exercises may not
(37). For example, a single countermo vement jump does not require
an athlete to absorb the same force as a depth jump. This realization
is important, because research indicates that muscle activation,
power , and relative impulse  are all higher in rebound exercises
compar ed to ballistic exercises, which demonstr ates an increased
level of intensi ty (37).
When consider ing exercise intensi ty, it is important to take note of
the exercise intensi ty overall as well as at the joint level. Resear ch
has shown that intensi ty is joint specific when considerin g the hips,
knees, and ankles of several exercises (61). For example, the
intensi ty of a backw ard jump is higher at the hips and ankles than it
is at the knees. Exercise modifications based on the joint
consider ations of an athlete are not uncommon, and considering the
intensi ty applied at each joint that is involved in an exercise will
likely result in mor e effective programming and adaptation.
1276
Frequency
Frequency refers to the number of plyometric training sessions per
week, typical ly ranging from one to four. This frequency depends on
the athletes’ sport, their experience with plyometric training, their
overall training status, the volume and intensi ty of plyometrics within
the broader resistance training program, and the time of year (e.g.,
off-season or in-season). For example, during the season, one
session per week is appropriate for American footbal l players, while
two or three sessions per week are common for track and field
athletes (2). During the off-season, plyometric training frequency
may increase to two or three sessions per week for American
footbal l players and to three or four sessions per week for track and
field athletes (2).
As with other program variables, resear ch on the optimal
frequency for plyometric training is limited. Because the literature is
sparse, strength and condi tioning professionals often rely on
practical experience when determining the frequency with which
athletes train using plyometric exercise. Rather than concentrating
on the frequency , many authors suggest relying more on the
recovery time between plyometric training sessions (19). Forty-eight
to 72 hours between plyometric sessions is a typical recovery time
guidel ine for prescribing plyometrics (19); using these typical
recovery times, athletes commonly perform two to three plyometric
sessions per week. As with resistance training, recovery between
workouts must be adequate to prevent overtraining (depending on
the sport, training status, and training intensi ty). Furthermor e,
moder ate to high volumes for a given body area should not be
performed on suc cessiv e days (51).
Recovery
Because plyometric drills involve maximal efforts to improve power ,
they are typical ly fatigue inducing and require complete and
adequate recovery (i.e., sufficient time between repetitions, sets,
and workouts) (51). Recovery for depth jumps may consist of 5 to
1277
10 seconds of rest between repetitions and 2 to 5 minutes between
sets. The time between sets is determined by a proper work-to-rest
ratio (i.e., 1:5 to 1:10) and is specific to the volume and type of drill
being performed. Drills should not be thought of as aerobic
endur ance training but as power training. Plyometric training can
induce fatigue  and inflammatory responses that can significantly
increase delayed onset of muscular soreness and may impair
jumping performance for up to 72 hours after a session. While these
effects are noticeable in power -related measur ements, strength
levels may remain unchanged (5, 18, 60). Given this prolonged
recovery period, strength and condi tioning professionals should
carefully schedule plyometric sessions to allow adequat e recovery
time between workouts and before competi tions. This approach
helps ensur e optimal performance and reduces the risk of
overtraining or injury .
Volume
Plyometric volume is typical ly expressed as the number of repetitions
and sets performed during a given training session (table 19.6).
Lower body plyometric volume is normal ly given as the number of
foot contacts  (each time a foot, or the feet together , contact the
surface) per workout (2, 19) but may also be expressed as distance,
as with plyometric bounding. For example, an athlete beginning a
plyometric training program may start with a bound for 30 yards (or
meters) per repetition but may progress to 100 yards (or meters)
per repetition for the same drill. Recommended lower body
plyometric volumes vary for athletes of different levels of experience
and also with the intensi ty level of the prescribed exercise. Upper
body plyometric volume is typical ly expressed as the number of
throws or catches per workout, and the ballistic nature of these
actions typical ly makes the training volumes reflect those of upper
body r esistance ex ercises (i.e. , 3-5 sets of 3-5 r epetitions).
TABLE 19.6   Plyometric Volumes
1278
Plyometric experience levelIntensity level of the plyometric drill
Low Moderate High
Beginner (no experience) 80 to 100 Nr to 40 Nr
Intermediate (some experience) 100 to 120 20 to 100 Nr to 20
Advanced (consider able experience) 120 to 200 20 to 120 20 to 40
Note:  Volume is giv en in contacts per session. Nr = not r ecommended.
Progression
Plyometrics is a form of resistance training and thus must follow the
principles of progressive overload , which  is the systematic
increase in training frequency , volume, and intensi ty in various
combinations. In simplistic models, as intensi ty increases, volume
decreases. This relationship , howev er, is variable depending on the
athlete’ s training status and the nature of the activity prescribed. For
example, athlete A who has minimal plyometric experie nce and a
low training status may do 3 sets of 10 repetitions of the pogo jump
to specifically train the SSC in the gastrocnemius–soleus complex,
but athlete B, who has a higher training age, may do the same drill
with an emphasis on minimizing ground contact time, and elite
athlete C may do the drill at the end of a warm-up to simply
potentiate the neuromuscular system. Further , after the pogo jump,
athlete A may do jumps over short hurdles, but athlete B may do the
depth jump instead and perform 2 sets of 4 repetitions with a 24-
inch (61 cm) box. Elite athlet e C may also do the depth jump but at
a higher volume and intensi ty, such as 4 sets of 8 repetitions using a
45-inch (114 cm) bo x.
Other factors such as the athlete’ s sport, sport season, and
training phase can influence the plyometric training schedule, design
of a plyometric training session, and the method of progressive
overload. An off-season plyometric program for America n footbal l,
for example, may be performed twice a week, but freshmen versus
senior players will do different plyometric activities. Additional ly, the
plyometric programs performed by skill (position) players versus
1279
offensive or defensive line players may be different. Thus, careful
consider ation should be given to each athlete’ s capaci ty and training
status when progressing a plyometric program, because volume and
intensi ty are not alw ays dir ectly r elated.
Effective plyometric programs include the same
variables that are essential to any training program
design: mode, intensity, frequency, recovery, volume,
and progression.
1280
Program Length
Resear ch has yet to determine an optimal plyometric training
program length . Currently, most programs range from 6 to 10 weeks
(2, 34); howev er, vertical jump height improves as quickly as four
weeks after the start of a plyometric training program (54). In
gener al, plyometric training should be prescribed similarly to
resistance training within a periodiz ed plan. For those sports
requiring quick, powerf ul movements, it is beneficial to perform
plyometric exercises throughout the training cycle. The intensi ty and
volume of the selected drills should vary with the training status of
the athlete and the sport season.
1281
Warm-Up
As in any training program, a plyometric exercise session should
begin with a specific warm-up that incorpor ates activation,
mobilization, and potentiation of the neuromuscular and
musculosk eletal system (refer to chapter 15 for movement
preparation guidelines). The specific warm-up for plyometric training
should consist of low-intensi ty, dynamic movements that increase in
intensi ty as the warm-up progresses. Table 19.7 provides a list and
explanation of examples of specific warm-up drills for plyometric
training.
Steps for Implementing a Plyometric
Training Program
1. Evaluate the athlete, including the athlete’ s sport and tr aining history .
2. Establ ish sport -, posi tion-, and athlete-speci fic goals.
3. Teach the athlete pr oper jumping, landing, and thr owing technique.
4. Assign pr oper ply ometric tr aining pr ogram design v ariables, addr essing
intensi ty, frequency , recovery, and v olume.
5. Properly pr ogress the ply ometric tr aining pr ogram.
1282
Age Considerations
It is becoming  more common for younger and older individuals to
want to augment the training programs for their sport with
plyometric exercise. When these exercises are applied appropriately ,
these populations can experience the same positive outcomes as
other age groups, with minimal risk of injury , with appropriate
consider ation of prescription to technical competence and strength
levels.
Adolescents
Although plyometrics commonly have been viewed as appropriate
only for condi tioning elite adult athletes, prepubescent and
adolescent children may also benefi t from training with plyometric
and plyometric -like exercises. Besides providing the well-
documented muscular power and bone strength adaptations, regular
participation in an appropriately designed plyometric training
program can better prepare young athletes for the demands of sport
practice and competi tion (20) by enhancing neuromuscu lar control
and performan ce. Resear ch has yet to determine a universal age at
which people are physical ly able to begin participa ting in a
plyometric training program. An analysis of the body’s development
provides some insight into the issue. Because the epiph yseal plates
of the bones of prepubescent children have yet to close (39, 47),
depth jumps and other high-intensi ty lower body drills are
contraindicated (2, 36, 46). Further , and as with all forms of
exercise, boys and girls should have the emotional maturi ty to
accept and follow directions and should be able to appreciate the
benefi ts and concerns associated with this method of training.
Empirical ly, 7- and 8-year-olds have been trained in progressive
plyometric programs and without detriment to future sport
involvement (20).
TABLE 19.7  Examples of Plyometric Warm-Up Drills
1283
Drill type Explanation
Marching Mimics running mo vements
Emphasiz es postur e and mo vement technique
Reinforces pr oper lower body mo vements f or running
Ground contact Prepares the body f or impact and high-intensi ty drills:
Rapid pogo jump—not al lowing the heel to touch the gr ound
(emphasiz es ankle dorsi flexion wi th activ e front foot gr ound
contact)
Straight-leg skip or bound—emphasiz es negative foot speed
(the r apid backw ard acceleration of the f oot) into the gr ound,
minimiz es knee flexion, and maximiz es hip extension to pr epare
for the impact of ply ometric dri lls
Exagger ated f orm of r eciprocal upper and lower extr emity
movements
Emphasiz es quick tak eoff and landing
Mimics ply ometric activi ties
Footwork Targets mul tiplanar ac celeration and deceler ation mechanics
Prepares for changes of dir ection during ply ometric dri lls
Examples: shut tle, shuf fle, pat tern, and stride dri lls
Neuromuscular
acceleration and
deceler ationMultijoint explosiv e directional changes wi th full-range
movements:
Forward, side, and backw ard lunge (simi lar to the f orward
[step] lunge ex ercise but mul tidirectional)
Squat pat terns (e.g. , a tal l reach into a deep snap-down then a
squat jump to a standing landing)
Note:  These examples are specific preparatory drills that can be incorpor ated into the
RAMP phases of a w arm-up f or ply ometrics; see chapter 15  for mor e detai l.
Plyometric exercise programs for children should be used to
develop the neuromuscular control and the anaer obic skills that will
carry over to safer participation in sport and athletics, both during
childhood and as they advance to higher levels of competi tion. For
example, several resear ch studies cite the benefi ts of using proper
landing techniq ue as a method of reducing an athlete’ s risk of lower
extremity injury (see the Safety Consider ations section starting on
page 576  for detai ls).
1284
It is extremely important that plyometric exercise programs for
children gradual ly progress from relatively simple drills to more
complex drills. It is important to focus on the quality of the
movements (e.g., proper body alignment and speed of movement)
to develop techniques that will be essential for more advanced
exercises. The current evidence suggests that a twice-weekly
program for 8 to 10 weeks beginning at 50 to 60 jumps a session
and increasing  exercise load weekly results in the largest changes in
running and jumping performance in young children (38). An
alternativ e program for children who do not have the capabi lity or
tolerance for a twice- weekly program would be a low-intensi ty
program for a longer dur ation (38).
Under proper supervision and with an appropriate
program, prepubescent and adolescent children  may
perform plyometric exerc ises. Depth jumps and high-
intensity lower body plyometrics are contraindicated for
this population.
Masters
Masters athletes find that they can maintain their physical
capabi lities late into life and are looking for additional training
insights. When designing a plyometric training program for a
masters athlete, the strength and condi tioning professional needs to
be specific in deciding on the goal of the program. Some primary
issues to consider are strength levels (i.e., ensuring that age-related
sarcopenia has not degraded muscle function) and any preexisting
orthopedic conditions (e.g., osteoarthri tis or any sort of surgical joint
interv ention) or joint degener ation. These call for even greater
caution and a more careful use of plyometric exercise. For example,
a healthy masters athlete without surgical history who wants to
improve his or her running performance should use depth jumps and
single-leg exercises cautiously , so alternate-leg boundin g and the
double-leg hopping would be better choices. Similarly, a masters
1285
runner with a history of knee surgery such as partial meniscus
removal or with significant joint degener ation should regard depth
jumps and single-leg plyometric exercises as contraindicated and use
other f orms of ply ometrics cautiously .
After consider ation of the predisposi tions related to the masters
athlete’ s physical condi tion, a plyometric program should be
designed according to the same guidel ines as outlined for adult
athletes, wi th the f ollowing emphases:
Intensi ty and volume should be carefully consider ed relative to
the perf ormance capaci ties of the individual.
Cautions regarding decreased strength capaci ties, potential for
degener ative joint condi tions, and decreased recovery
capaci ties associated wi th aging should be appl ied.
It is important to note how the masters athlete feels after
training; soreness may occur, but the program should be
modified if chronic or ex cessiv e pain or discomf ort is pr esent.
1286
Plyometrics and Other Forms of
Exercise
Plyometric exercise is only one part of an athlete’ s overall training
program. Many sports and activities use multiple energy systems or
require other forms of exercise to properly prepare athletes for
competi tion. Each energy system and sport-speci fic need must be
included in a wel l-designed tr aining pr ogram.
Plyometric Exercise and Resistance
Training
A combination of plyometrics and resistance training during a
training cycle should be structur ed to allow maximal efficiency and
physical improvement. The following list and table 19.8 provide
guidel ines f or dev eloping a combined pr ogram:
Combine lower body resistance training with upper body
plyometrics, and upper body resistance training with lower
body ply ometrics.
Performing heavy resistance training sessions and plyometric
sessions on the same day is not usually recommended (17,
24). Howev er, many athlet es may benefi t from complex
training , a combination of resistance training and plyometric
training within the same training session to enhance fast and
slow f orce expr ession.
If athletes perform this type of training, adequate recovery is
needed between ply ometrics and other high-intensi ty training.
Plyometrics can comprise a stand- alone training session or be
incorpor ated into a resistance training session. Incorpor ating
plyometrics into a resistan ce training session may have
neuromuscular recruitment benefi ts through facilitating
postactiv ation potentiation during biomechanical ly similar
movements (22).
1287
TABLE 19.8  Sample Schedule for Integrating
Resistance Training and Plyometrics
DayResistance
training sessionPlyometric
session Single session complex*
Monda yLow-intensi ty (light)
upper bodyHigh-intensi ty
(reactiv e) lower
bodyHigh-intensi ty (hea vy) lower body
resistance tr aining + Lower body
plyometrics
Tuesda yHigh-intensi ty
(heavy) lower bodyLow-intensi ty upper
bodyLow-intensi ty (light) upper body
resistance tr aining + Upper body
plyometrics
Thursda yHigh-intensi ty
(heavy) upper bodyLow-intensi ty
(ballistic) lower
bodyHigh-intensi ty (hea vy) upper body
resistance tr aining + Upper body
plyometrics
Friday Low-intensi ty (light)
lower bodyHigh-intensi ty upper
bodyLow-intensi ty (light) lower body
resistance tr aining + Lower body
plyometrics
*Emphasis on r esistance tr aining + ply ometrics wi thin a total body session.
The following are classifications and examples of complex training
based on Cormier and col leagues (22):
Contrast training  involves alternating high-load exercises
and high-velocity exercises in contrast pairs in a set-by-set
fashion with sufficient inter-set rest to avoid fatigue-ind uced
interference. An example is an American footbal l lineman
alternating sets of heavy bench presses with sets of clap push-
ups.
Ascending complex training  involves sets of a high-velocity
exercise followed by sets of a contrasting high-f orce exercise.
An example is a weightl ifter doing 2 sets of maximal-ef fort box
jumps bef ore perf orming mid-thigh power cleans.
Descending sets require multiple high-f orce exercises to be
completed before the execution of high-velocity exercises. An
example is a thrower doing 3 sets of 2 repetitions of heavy
back squats followed by 3 sets of 4 repetitions of overhead
medicine bal l throws.
1288
Plyometric Exercise and Aerobic Exercise
Many sports—such as basketball and soccer—have both an
anaer obic (i.e., power) and an aerobic component. Therefore,
multiple types of training must be combined to best prepare athletes
for these types of sports. Because aerobic exercise may have an
interfering effect on power production (17), it is advisable to perform
plyometric exercise before aerobic endur ance training. The program
design variable s do not change and should complement each other
to most ef fectively pr epare these athletes f or competi tion.
1289
Safety Considerations
Plyometric exercise is not inherently danger ous; howev er, as with all
modes of exercise, the risk of injury exists. Injuries can occur simply
due to an accident, but they more typical ly occur when proper
training procedures are violated and may be the result of an
insufficient strength and condi tioning base, inadequate warm-up ,
improper progression of lead-up drills, inappr opriate volume or
intensi ty for the phase of training, poor shoes or surface, or a simple
lack of skill. The following sections identi fy and address these and
other risk factors. Knowledge of risk factors can improve the safety
of athletes perf orming ply ometric ex ercise.
Pretraining Evaluation of the Athlete
To reduce the risk of injury and facilitate the performance of
plyometric exercises, the athlete must understand proper plyometric
technique and possess a sufficient base of strength, speed, and
balance. In addition, the athlete must be sufficiently matur e, both
physical ly and psychological ly, to participate in a plyometric training
program. The following evaluativ e items can help determine whether
an athlete meets these condi tions.
Technique
Before adding any drill to an athlete’ s plyometric program, the
strength and condi tioning professional must first demonstr ate proper
technique to the athlete and then coach and cue the athlete on
proper technique to maximiz e the drill’s effectiveness and minimiz e
the risk of injury . For lower body plyometrics, proper landing
technique is essential. If an athlete’ s center of gravity is offset from
the base of support, performance is hinder ed, and injury may occur.
The shoulders should be over the knees and the knees should be
over the toes during the landing, which the athlete accompl ishes
through ankle dorsiflexion and knee and hip flexion (figure 19.3). In
addition, when  viewing the frontal plane and motion of the athlete
1290
performing lower body plyometrics, it is essential that the knees are
positioned over the toes. Inward movement of the knees— also
termed dynamic valgus —is a significant risk factor for knee
injuries of all types, including patellofemoral pain and tears or
ruptur es of the anterior cruciate l igament (ACL) (45).
In addition to instructing an athlete on a proper body position
while landing, the strength and condi tioning professional must
explain, coach,  and cue the athlete to land with an active flat foot.
In preparation for ground contact, the athlete’ s ankles should be
dorsiflexed (so that the toes are pulled back toward the knees). This
means that the bottom of the foot is parallel to the ground as the
athlete comes into landing. Immediately before landing, the athlete
should be taught to aggressively plantarflex the ankle to “attack the
ground with the foot.” This achiev es two outcomes. First, the
plantarflexion increases the tension in the gastrocnem ius–soleus
complex at ground contact, which increases the efficacy of the SSC
and enhances the output power in the resulting jump. Second, the
last-second adjustment in the angle of the foot, along with the
increased muscle tension, means that the heels stay off the ground
during the land–tak eoff action. This enhances both anterior and
vertical propulsion and is often coached as “the credit card rule,”
meaning that enough of the foot should be in contact with the
ground to achiev e high impulses, but the strength and conditioning
professional should be able to slide a credit card under the athlete’ s
heels (12a).
Strength
Consider ation of the athlete’ s level of strength is necessary before he
or she performs plyometrics. Strength is essential for the
maintenance of postur e through the plyometric action and the ability
to manage and appropriately direct ground reaction forces through
effective ground contact to optimiz e performance benefits and
reduce potential for injury (figure 19.4). Without these outcomes,
safe and effective techniques  cannot be maintained as the intensi ty
1291
of plyometric exercise is increased. Previous recommendations for
lower body plyometrics stated that the athlete’ s 1RM squat should
be at least 1.5 times his or her body weight (17, 24, 36, 50, 63).
Howev er, many plyometric activities can be safely taught to athletes
without such formal ized levels of strength (figure 19.5). It is our
recommendation that plyometrics be included for all athletes whose
sports require running, landing, jumping, or cutting. As a
prerequisi te, teaching proper alignment and movement mechanics
through the use of plyometr ic exercise has been shown repeatedly
to decrease the athlete’ s risk of injury during practices and games
(50). Various authors have theoriz ed that basic in-place jumps such
as repeated pogo jumps and countermo vement jumps require
relatively low levels of strength; repeated hops and jumps may
require a basic strength level equiv alent to a back squat of 1 × body
weight, bounding and depth jumps using a box 12 inches (30 cm)
tall or shorter may have a back squat strength equiv alent of 1.5 ×
body weight, and depth or box jumps with a box higher than 12
inches (30 cm) may require a back squat strength equiv alent of 2 ×
body weight (58).
1292
FIGURE 19.3 Proper plyometric  landing technique. (a) When learning to land and stop,
the shoulders are in line with the knees, which helps place the center of gravity over the
body’s base of support. The knees are over the toes; excessiv e inward (valgus) movement
increases the risk of lower extremity injury; weight is evenly distributed through a flat foot
to allow a balanced deceler ation position. Learning to land and stop, decelerating body
mass completely , is a precursor to learning to land and rebound (i.e., reaccelerate body
mass). (b) Proper landing technique to facilitate reactionary rebound actions; the shoulders
are in line with the knees, the ankles are stiff, and athlete contacts the ground with the
midfoot and forefoot to enable a rebound acceleration to occur. Note the alignment of the
hips, knees and toes, with the feet hip-width apart to optimiz e vertical or horizontal force
(depending on the subsequent mo vement).
Back squat equivalent strength  is a descriptiv e term used to
infer the neces sary strength capaci ty required to tolerate the impact
stress of the exercise so that it does not acutely overreach the
athlete and become injurious. The back squat is illustrative due to
the nature of its axial load on the total body, yet it is recogniz ed that
not every athlete measur es maximal squat strength. It is important
to note that it is not simply the magni tude of strength that is
important but the athletic quality to be able to apply  the force
required within the given ground contact time. Therefore, a focus on
rate of force developmen t as well as magni tude of force
development is an important consider ation within plyometric
prescription.
1293
Balance
Balance is a lower body plyometric prerequisi te that should not be
overlook ed. Balance  is the maintenance of a position without
movement for a given period of time. Many lower body plyometric
drills require the athlete to move in nontraditional patterns or on a
single leg. These types of drills necessi tate a solid, stable base of
support on which the athlete can safely and correctly perform the
exercises. Three balance tests are provided in table 19.9, listed in
order of difficulty; each test position must be held for 30 seconds
(62). For example, an athlete beginning plyometric training for the
first time would be required to stand on one leg for 30 seconds
without falling. An experie nced athlete beginning an advanced
plyometric training program must maintain a single-leg half squat for
30 seconds without falling. Additional ly, the surface on which the
balance testing  is performed should be the same as that used in the
plyometric dri lls.
1294
FIGURE 19.4 Char acteristics and progressions of plyometric exercise to emphasiz e
eccentric loading for athletes of varying  strength levels. ECC = eccentric; CON = concentric;
BW = body weight;  + = low emphasis; ++ = moder ate emphasis; +++ = high emphasis;
L = low height; M = moder ate height; H = high height; VH = very high height; CMJ =
countermo vement jump; SJ = static jump).
*overall priori ty is on corr ect ski ll execution and landing mechanics
**not appl icable to ex ercises r equiring landing only (ECC+++ column)
Reprinted by permission from T.J. Suchomel, J.P. Wagle, J. Douglas, et al., “Implementing Eccentric Resistance
Training-Part 2: Practical Recommendations,” Journal of Functional Morphology and Kinesiology 4, no. 3 (2019): 55.
Distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://creativecommons
.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
1295
FIGURE 19.5 Theor etical relationship between strength and the optimization of
plyometric ex ercise perf ormance.
Reprinted by permission from T.J. Suchomel, J.P. Wagle, J. Douglas, et al., “Implementing Eccentric Resistance
Training-Part 2: Practical Recommendations,” Journal of Functional Morphology and Kinesiology 4, no. 3 (2019): 55.
Distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://creativecommons
.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
TABLE 19.9  Balance Tests
Test* Variations
Standing Double leg
Single leg
Quarter squat Double leg
Single leg
Half squat Double leg
Single leg
*A suc cessful test oc curs when the posi tion can be held f or 30 seconds wi thout f alling.
Physical Characteristics
Athletes who weigh more than 220 pounds (100 kg) may be at an
increased risk for injury when performing plyometric exercises (50,
1296
63). Greater weight (mass) increases the compr essive force on joints
during the exercises, thereby predisposing ankle, knee, and hip–
pelvic complex joints to injury . Therefore, athletes weighin g over 220
pounds (100 kg) should approach high-volume and high-intensi ty
plyometric exercises and depth jumps from heights greater than 18
inches (46 cm) with cautio n (50, 63). As with other forms of
exercise, an athlete’ s joint structur e and previous injuries  must also
be exam ined before he or she begins a plyometric training program.
Previous injuries or abnormal ities of the spine, lower extremities, or
upper extremities may increase an athlete’ s risk of injury during
plyometric exercise. Specifically, athletes with a history of muscle
strains, patho logical joint laxity, or spinal dysfunction —including
vertebr al disk dysfunction or compr ession—should use caution when
beginning a plyometric training program (28, 29, 36, 55). Ultimately ,
because the body composi tion, strength, and technical competency
can differ between athletes who weigh the same, professional
judgment always should be applied when considering plyometric
prescription.
Equipment and Facilities
In addition to athletes’ fitness and health, the area and equipment
used f or ply ometric dri lls ma y signi ficantly af fect their saf ety.
Landing Surface
To prevent injuries, the landing surface used for lower body
plyometrics must possess adequate shock -absorbing properties. A
grass field, suspended floor, or rubber mat is a good surface choice
(36). Surfaces such as concr ete, tile, and hardwood  are not
recommended because they lack effective shock -absorbing
properties (36). Excessiv ely thick exercise mats (6 inches [15 cm] or
thicker) may extend the amortization phase and thus not allow
efficient use of the stretch reflex. Mini-tr ampol ines are commonly
used for beginning plyometric and balance training in rehabi litation
(32). While these devices may provide a necessary introduction to
1297
plyometrics, especial ly for those recovering from musculoskeletal
injury , mini-tr ampol ines, like thick exercise mats, are not effective for
plyometric training of uninjur ed athletes because the amortization
phase is extended while the athlete is in contact with the elastic
surface.
Training Area
The amount of space neede d depends on the drill. Most bounding
and running drills require at least 30 yards (or meters) of
straighta way, though some drills may require a straighta way of 100
yards (or meters). For most standing, box, and depth jumps, only a
minimal surface area is needed, but the ceiling height must be at
least 10 f eet (3 m) to be adequate.
Equipment
Boxes used for box jumps and depth jumps must be sturdy and
should have a nonslip top. Boxes should range in height from 6 to 42
inches (15-107 cm) and should have landing surfaces of at least 18
by 24 inches (46 × 61 cm) (19). The box should be constructed of
sturdy wood (e.g., 3/4-inch [1.9 cm] plywood) or heavy-gauge metal
that is covered in a protectiv e covering to reduce the risk of injury if
the athlete contacts the box. High density foam within a cubed
framework with solid landing surfaces is also appropriate.  To further
reduce injury risk, there are several ways of making the landing
surface nonslip such as adding nonslip treads, mixing sand into the
paint used to cover the box, or affixing rubberiz ed flooring  to the top
(19).
Proper Footwear
Athletes must use footwear with good ankle and foot support; good
lateral stability; and a wide, nonslip sole (50). Ankle injury risk may
be increased in shoes with a narrow sole and poor mid-foot support,
especial ly with lateral movements. Shoes with insufficient foot
support may lead to arch or lower leg injuries or both, while
footwear without enough cushioning might lead to knee and hip
1298
joint damage. Shoes with excessiv e cushioning may also interfere
with the amortization phase process, and a shoe that has increased
inbuilt pronatio n (such as a weightl ifting shoe) may interfere with
ground contact mechanics and therefore the safety and effectiveness
of the ex ercise.
Supervision
In addition to the safety consider ations already outlined, close
monitoring of athletes is necessary to ensur e proper technique.
Plyometric exercise is not intrinsical ly danger ous when performed
correctly, but as with other forms of training, poor technique may
unnecessari ly predispose an athlete to injury .
Depth Jumping
There is a limit to the maxim al height at which a depth jump can be
effectively and safely performed. A height of 48 inches (122 cm)
would provide a significant overload on the muscles, but the
resistance may be too great for many athletes to overcome while
maintaining correct technique (47). Jumping from such a height
increases the possibi lity of injury; furthermor e, the amou nt of force
to be overcome is so great that the amortization phase is extended
and thus the purpose of the exercise is defeated. The recommended
height for depth jumps ranges from 16 to 42 inches (41-107 cm),
with 30 to 32 inches (76-81c m) being the norm (4, 21, 30, 43, 44,
48). The depth jump box height for athletes who weigh  over 220
pounds (100 kg) should be 18 inches (46 cm) or less.
1299
Conclusion
The major goal of plyometric training is to rapidly apply force to
provide an overload to the agonist muscles. Although it has been
repeatedly shown that plyometric exercise increases muscular power
for athletes in a formal training program (34, 53, 65, 67), resear ch
has yet to determine whether mechanical or neurophysiological
adaptations account for the improvement. Plyometrics should be
consider ed not an end in itself but part of an appropriately
periodiz ed program that includes strength, speed, endurance, and
mobility training. Plyometrics requires an appropriate warm-up and
should be preplanned to allow adequate recovery. After the athlete
has begun a proper strength and condi tioning program, plyometric
training may be used to further develop impulses and positive
transfer of tr aining benefi ts.
PLYOMETRIC DRILLS
Lower Body Plyometric Drills
JUMPS IN PLACE
  1  Pogo Jump   582
  2  Ankle Hop   582
  3  Squat Jump   583
  4  Jump and R each   584
  5  Tuck Jump   585
  6  Split Squat Jump   586
  7  Cycled Spl it Squat Jump   587
  8  Tuck Hop   588
  9  Pike Jump   589
STANDING JUMPS
1300
10  Vertical Jump   590
11  Vertical Hop   591
12  Jump Ov er Barrier   591
13  Standing Long Jump   592
MULTIPLE HOPS AND JUMPS
14  Multiple Horiz ontal Low Hur dle Jump   593
15  Double-Leg Zigzag Jump   594
16  Linear Hop   595
17  Multiple B arrier Hop   596
18  Lateral Barrier Jump   597
19  Four-Hurdle Hop   598
20  Progressive Later al Jump   599
BOUNDS
21  Skip  600
22  Power Skip   601
23  Lateral Skip   602
24  Linear B ound   603
25  Double- Arm Linear B ound   604
BOX DRILLS
26  Drop Step to Later al Bound and R eturn   605
27  Single-Leg Push-Of f  606
28  Alternating-Leg Push-Of f  607
29  Lateral Push-Of f  608
30  Rear Foot–Elevated Mul tidirectional Hop   609
31  Side-to- Side Push-Of f  610
32  Box Jump   611
33  Box Hop   612
34  Lateral Box Jump   613
1301
35  Drop Freeze  614
DEPTH JUMPS
36  Depth Jump   615
37  Depth Jump to B ox Jump   616
38  Depth Jump I nto Dir ectional Sprint   617
39  Depth Jump to Long Jump   618
40  Depth Jump to 180-Degr ee Turn  619
41  Depth Hop   620
Upper Body Plyometric Drills
THROWS
  42  Chest P ass  621
  43  Two-Hand Ov erhead Thr ow  622
  44  Rotational Thr ow  623
  45  Single- Arm Thr ow  624
  46  Power Dr op  625
  47  Half-Kneel ing Ov erhead Medicine B all Throw for Distance  
626
  48  Single- Arm R everse Thr ow  626
  49  Viking Thr ow for Height   628
  50  Medicine B all Slam f rom Single-Leg B alance   629
PLYOMETRIC PUSH-UPS
  51  Depth Push-Up   630
  52  Lateral Travel Push-Up   631
TRUNK PLYOMETRICS
  53  45-Degr ee Sit-Up  632
  54  Seated R otational Medicine B all Throw  633
  55  Leg Pushdown   634
1302
LOWER BODY PLYOMETRIC DRILLS
Jumps in Place
  1  POGO JUMP
Intensi ty level: Low
Direction:  Vertical
Starting position: Get into a comfortable, upright stance with feet
hip-width apart.
Arm action:  None or double arm
Preparatory mo vement:  Begin wi th a sl ight countermo vement.
Upward movement:  Jump up , with primary motion at the ankle joint.
Down ward movement:  Land with an active flat foot contact in the
starting posi tion, wi th hips and knees sti ff, and immediately r epeat.
Note:  This drill should be performed with little horizontal (forward or
backw ard) or later al mo vement.
COMMON ERRORS
Flexing the hips and knees on landing to increase vertical
force, which increases ground contact time and changes
the nature of the ankle-dominant exercise
Not dorsiflexing the ankle in flight; this makes athletes
land on their toes, which changes the nature of the
ground contact
1303
  2  ANKLE HOP
Intensi ty level: Medium
Direction:  Vertical
Starting position: Get into a comfortable, upright stance on one foot.
The non-hopping leg is held in a stationary position with the knee
flexed during the ex ercise.
Arm action:  None or double arm
Preparatory mo vement:  Begin wi th a sl ight countermo vement.
Upward movement:  Using the balancing foot, hop upward, with
primary motion at the ankle joint.
Down ward movement:  Have the ankle dorsiflexed in flight to prepare
for an active flat foot contact. (Note:  The second photo does not yet
show the left foot in the needed position for landing. ) Land in the
1304
starting position with the hips and knees stiff, and immediately
repeat. R epeat wi th the opposi te leg after a brief r est.
Note:  This drill should be performed with little horizontal (forward or
backw ard) or later al mo vement.
COMMON ERRORS
Flexing the hips and knees on landing to increase vertical
force; this increases ground contact time and changes
the nature of the ankle-dominant exercise
Landing off-balance so that rebound hops become
multidirectional rather than vertical
  3  SQUAT JUMP
1305
Intensi ty level: Low
Direction:  Vertical
Starting position: Get into a squat position (thighs slightly above
parallel with the ground) with feet hip- to shoulder -width apart.
Interlock the fingers and place the hands behind the head.
Arm action:  None
Preparatory mo vement:  None
Upward movement:  Explosiv ely jump up to a maximum height.
Extend the body as tal l as possible.
Down ward movement:  Ankles should be dorsiflexed in flight and
ready for flat foot landing. (Note:  The second photo does not yet
show the feet in the needed position for landing. ) Land in the squat
position, and immediately r epeat the jump .
COMMON ERRORS
Landing and immediately jumping again before resetting
to achieve squat depth for the subsequent jump
Lack of hip and knee extension, meaning the body is not
fully extended in flight
1306
  4  JUMP AND REACH
Intensi ty level: Low
Direction:  Vertical
Starting position: Get into a comfortable, upright stance with feet
hip-width apart.
Arm action:  Double arm wi th reach at the top of the jump
Preparatory mo vement:  Begin wi th a countermo vement.
Upward movement:  Explosiv ely jump up and reach for an object or
target.
Down ward movement:  Ankles should be dorsiflexed in flight and
ready for an active flat-foot landing. Land in the starting position and
immediately r epeat the jump .
Note:  Emphasis is on vertical height with minimal delay between
jumps. Also, this drill should be performed with little horizontal
1307
(forward or backw ard) or later al mo vement.
COMMON ERRORS
Not coordinating arm action with the jump; everything
should move upward at the same time
Trunk not being vertical at takeoff, meaning that vertical
force generation is compromised and forward movement
will occur
  5  TUCK JUMP
Intensi ty level: Medium
Direction:  Vertical
1308
Starting position: Get into a comfortable, upright stance with feet
hip-width apart.
Arm action:  Double arm
Preparatory mo vement:  Begin wi th a countermo vement.
Upward movement:  Explosiv ely jump up. Pull the knees to the chest,
quickly grasp the knees with both hands, and release before landing.
Pull the ankles toward the knees in flight to prepare for an active
flat-foot landing.
Down ward movement:  Land in the starting position, and
immediately r epeat the jump .
COMMON ERRORS
Pulling the knees up rather than pushing into the ground
maximally then tucking knees
Failure to perform a countermovement on subsequent
repetitions; this decreases ground contact time but
reduces vertical force generation
1309
  6  SPLIT SQUAT JUMP
Intensi ty level: Low
Direction:  Vertical
Starting position: Get into a lunge position with one leg forward (hip
and knee joints flexed approximately 90 degrees) and the other
behind the midl ine of the body wi th the trunk v ertical.
Arm action:  Double arm or none
Preparatory mo vement:  Begin wi th a countermo vement.
Upward movement: Explosiv ely jump up, using the arms to assist as
needed. Maximum height and power should be emphasiz ed.
Down ward movement:  Dorsiflex the ankles in preparation for an
active flat-foot landing. (Note:  The second photo does not yet show
the feet positioned for landing. ) When landing, maintain  the lunge
position (with the same leg forward) and immediately repeat the
jump. After completing a set, r est and swi tch front legs.
1310