# Chapter 20: Program Design and Technique for Speed and Agility Training

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

**PDF Pages:** 1398--1511

CHAPTER  20
PROGRAM DESIGN AND
TECHNIQUE FOR SPEED AND
AGILITY TRAINING
Thomas Dos’Santos, PhD, and Paul A. Jones,
PhD
The authors would like to acknowledge the significant contributions of Brad H.
DeWeese, S ophia Nimphius, and Stev en S. Plisk to this chapter .
After completing this chapter, you will be able to
describe the underlying biomechanical constructs of sprint,
change-of -direction, maneuv erability, and agi lity perf ormance;
apply f undamental biomechanical mo vement principles to the
coaching of locomotion modes and techniques;
analyz e the abi lities and ski lls needed to perf orm speci fic
movement tasks;
effectively moni tor the dev elopment of sprint, change-of -
direction, and agi lity abilities;
apply evidence-based methods f or dev eloping speed, change of
direction, and agi lity; and
design and implement tr aining pr ograms to maximiz e athletic
performance.
1398
This chapter addresses the development of speed, change-of -
direction, and agility abilities. Although the term speed  is often used
when an athlete displa ys one or all of these aspects of physical
performance, it is critical to understand that athlete development
requires various underpinning physical capaci ties and skills as a
result of differing biomechanical requirements. These three
important aspects of physical performance can be defined as
follows:
Speed . The skills and abilities needed to achiev e high
movement v elocities
Change of direction.  The skills and abilities needed to
explosiv ely change mo vement dir ection, v elocities, or modes
Agility. The skills and abilities needed to change direction,
velocity, or mode in r esponse to a stimulus
The ability to outrun and maneuv er the competi tion is a hallmark
of most athletic endea vors. Further , the ability to chang e direction
rapidly during an activity can mute the effect of an opponent ’s speed
or provide both physical and tactical advantages on the field of play.
Although it may seem that these scenarios all involve the “speed” of
an athlete, this perceived speed may be a result of one quality or a
combination of the three qualities just listed. Within sport, high-
speed human locomotion can be categoriz ed as linear or
multidirectional. Gener ating high speeds linearly , more commonly
referred to as sprinting , is the underlying requirement for success in
many track and field events as well as open-field running  in game-
based contexts. While linear speed is important in team sports, play
is primari ly multidirectional. As a result, these athletes’ success
partial ly depen ds on responding to ever-changing game  scenarios
through fast, efficient changes of direction and decelerations,
whereas speed requires the ability to accelerate and reach maximal
velocity.
Because of the nature of most sports, there are scenarios in
which athletes have a predetermined change of direction to make
1399
and they are limited only by their physical capaci ty to perform this
activity (e.g., a route, play, or predetermined pattern). The physical
capaci ty to change direction while deceler ating and then
reaccelerating, sometimes using a different mode of travel, is
change-of-direction (COD ) ability, whereas agility  requires the
use of perceptual-cogni tive ability in combination with change-of -
direction ability. This highlights the similar and contrasting qualities
of speed, change of direction, and agility. For example,
acceleration  is a part of change-of -direction ability and agility, but
additional aspects such as deceleration  ability and mode of
movement differentiate the training for speed from the training for
change of direction and agility. The physical capaci ty to change
direction may be a compone nt of agility (i.e., action capacity), but
the perceptual-cogni tive component influences the physical demands
of agility. Therefore, while reading this chapter , one should
understand that although these qualities overlap some, differing
physical, techn ical, or perceptual-cogni tive development is required
to impr ove each of these aspects of ph ysical perf ormance.
When athlete s are sprinting or changing direction, their
performance is a function of physical capaci ty and technical
proficiency . While biomechanical and metabol ic efficiency underpin
performance in aerobic sport, effective application of force (net
impulse) limits speed, change  of direction, and agility. Simply put, an
athlete’ s success in these explosiv e movements is the product of an
athlete’ s strength capaci ty combined with the ability to use this
strength within the constr aints of the activity. Strength  is often
associated with an athlete’ s capaci ty to produce force, but it is
important to understand that while high levels of maximal strength
are desirable attributes in sport, sprint, COD, and agility events occur
in periods that prevent athletes from producing and expressing their
maximal strength, thus the rate at which net forces are produced is
essential.
Within sprinting, the application of force allows the athlete to
accelerate, attain high velocities, and attempt to maintain the high
1400
velocities. In addition to the force application associated with
acceleration and attainment of velocity in sprinting, COD ability
requires effective application of force to deceler ate, deflect the
center of mass, and then reaccelerate in another direction. Further
still, agility performance is consider ed a function of the athlete’ s
ability not only to change direction but also specifically to change
direction in response to a stimulus (4) such as a defender or ball;
this is known as perception–action coupling . For this reason,
strength and condi tioning professionals must be aware of their
training choices regarding the development of physical
characteristics that assist in promoting speed, COD, and agility on
both the tr ack and the field.
Speed requires the ability to accelerate and reach
maximal velocity, whereas agility performance requires
the use of perceptual- cognitive ability in combin ation
with the ability to decelerate and then reaccelerate in an
intended direction.
1401
Speed and Agility Mechanics
To execute movement techn iques, athletes must apply force—the
product of mass and acceleration. Due to the limited available time
to produce force during most athletic activities, two variables
describe f orce relative to the time a vailable to pr oduce f orce:
Rate of force development (RFD) —The development of
maximal force in minimal time, typical ly used as an indicator of
explosiv e strength (3).
Impulse —The product of the gener ated force and the time
required for its production, which is measur ed as the area
under the force–time curve. According to the impulse–
momentum relationship , net impul se dictates the
magni tude of change of momentum of an object. Because
mass remains constant in most sporting scenarios, increases in
net impulse ar e ther efore proportionate to changes in v elocity.
Physics of Sprinting, Change of Direction,
and Agility
Force  represents the interaction of two physical objects. Force is a
vector quanti ty, meaning that it has both magni tude (size) and
direction. Traditional ly, force is described as a push or a pull exerted
on one objec t by another , which prevents both objects from
occupying the same space. This movement of mass changes an
object ’s velocity, causing ac celeration.
Within the strength and condi tioning profession, velocity  and
speed are often used interchangeably . For a proper discussion on
sprint and agility performanc e, these terms need to be separ ated.
Speed is a scalar quanti ty, which means that it describes only how
fast an object is moving. Speed is the rate at which an object covers
a distance. Like force, velocity is a vector quant ity. Velocity
describes both how fast an object is traveling and its direction. In
short, v elocity is speed wi th a dir ection.
1402
Acceleration refers to the rate at which an object ’s velocity
changes over time. Once a force acts on a physical object, the mass
will change direction and leave the space it was occupying.
Acceleration of the object will continue if external forces continue to
change velocity. In practical settings, deceler ation replaces negative
acceleration  in describing a change f rom higher to lower v elocity.
Rate of Force Developm ent
Within the sporting context,  the ability to produce force rapidly is
arguably a more desirable trait than maximal force production given
the time constr aints associated with most high-intensi ty actions
(100). While the ability to generate high levels of maximal force has
been shown to improve performance in jump height and other
athletic measu res, most competi tive scenarios do not occur within a
time frame that allows an athlete to gener ate maximal forces (27).
Specifically, the gener ation of maximal contraction force takes at
least 300 milliseconds, while many sport activities consume 0 to 200
milliseconds (figure 20.1) (1). For this reason, in sport settings
where success is restricted to timing of movement, RFD is a more
useful measur e of an athlete’ s impulsiv e ability (5). RFD can be
described as the change in force divided by the chang e in time
(100).
1403
FIGURE 20.1 Force as a function of time, indicat ing maximum strength, rate of force
development (RFD), and force at 0.2 seconds for untrained (solid blue line), heavy
resistance–tr ained (dashed yellow line), and explosiv e-ballistic–trained (dotted black line)
subjects. Impulse is the change in momentum resulting from a force, measur ed as the
product of force and time (represented by the area under each curve), and is increased by
improving RFD. When functional movements are performed, force is typical ly applied very
briefly —often for 0.1 to 0.2 seconds— whereas absolute maximum force development may
require 0.6 to 0.8 seconds.
Reprinted by permission from K. Häkkinen, M. Alen, and P.V. Komi, “Changes in Electrical and Mechanical Behavior of
Leg Extensor Muscle During Heavy Resistance Strength Training,” Acta Physiologica Scandinavic 125 (1985): 573-585;
and K. Häkkinen, P.V. Komi, and M. Alen, “Effect of Explosive Type Strength Training on Isometric Force- and
Relaxation Time, Electromyographic and Muscle Fibre Characteristics of Leg Extensor Muscles,” Acta Physiologica
Scandinavica 125 (1985): 587-600.
The ability to accelerate a mass depends on a change in velocity
resulting from the application  of an external force. Therefore, from a
practical standpoint, an athlete wishing to achiev e higher
acceleration capabilities should apply forces at a greater rate and
orient f orce in the optimal dir ection (84).
Impulse
For an object to change its position, forces must be applied (to
overcome inertia) to produce a change in velocity. Athletes
attempting to increase locomotor speeds through the production of
force never apply force instantaneously . In fact, force is applied to
1404
the running surface over a period of time (i.e., impulse) in the stance
phase of sprinting (figure 20.2) or in the plant phase of changing
direction. The length of time athletes are in this stance or plant
phase is termed their ground contact time. The product of the
time the force is applied to the ground and the amount of force
applied is termed impulse and can be graphical ly represented as the
area under a force–time curve. Changes in impulse result in changes
of the athlete’ s momentum and therefore the ability to either
accelerate or deceler ate, thus underpinning human locomotion.
FIGURE 20.2 Sprint ground reaction force and impulse during the (a) acceleration phase
and (b) maximal- velocity phase. W b = body weight.
Figure 20.2 demonstr ates how the vertical and horizontal forces
differ in magni tude when the acceleration phase (figure 20.7 on
page 645) is compared to the maximal- velocity phase (figure 20.8 on
page 646), which reflects the two different body positions used to
produce force through maximal extension. Further , these two
diagrams demonstr ate the concept of impulse (represented as the
area under the force–time curve) during the braking phase ,
indicated by a negativ e horizontal force, or during the propulsive
phase  that occurs where there is a positive horizontal force. These
two phases of impulse are indicated by the vertical dotted line. It
1405
should be noted that during maximal- velocity phases, production of
force is asymmetrical and the RFD is very high, resulting in much
shorter ground contact times in comparison to the acceleration
phase.
Momentum  is defined as the product between the mass of an
object and the velocity of movement. During a sprint, an athlete’ s
body mass remains constant.  Thus, given the same time frame, the
only way to achiev e a greater impulse is to gener ate greater net
force. This increase in net impulse leads to an increase in
momentum or a decrease in momentum, depending on whether the
athlete is intending to accelerate or reaccelerate or deceler ate before
a COD or as an isolated action. In other words, a change in impulse
results in a change in momentum and is the cause of an object ’s
movement.
Within human locomotion, the magni tude of the force coupled
with the length of time the force is produced during an individual
step is paramount to success. Changes in these forces can increase
or decrease the athlete’ s momentum. For this reason, training should
focus on developing impulse—the area under the force–time curve—
in addi tion to RFD .
Power has not been discuss ed here because it is derived from
force and velocity. Therefore, power is consider ed a mechanical
construct and, practical ly speaking, it can be more useful to directly
measur e the characteristics that determine power production (e.g.,
force and velocity), because measur ement of power alone does not
give insight into the performance in a way that is fully useful to
practitioners. In understanding that force, RFD, and impulse are
direct, underlying characteristics that dictate explosiv e performance,
one does not require a more complex derived value to gain
additional insight.
Practical Implications for Speed
To displace their body mass down a track or field, athletes must
produce forces sufficient to overcome the effects of gravity and
1406
create a positive change in velocity. Within a short sprint, force is the
effort needed to accelerate an athlete up to his or her highest
achiev able speeds, which are largely determined by physiological
factors. These forces or efforts are produced rapidly , with time
constr aints that are shorter than the time needed for maximal
voluntary force production. For this reason, rate of force production
may be a more important factor for sprinting success. Moreover,
since sprinting success is largely dependent on the production of
forces within a short amount of time, impulse is an import ant
underlying f actor.
Practical Implications for Change of
Direction and Agility
In addition to the requirement for acceleration, the production of
braking forces over certain periods of time, or foot contacts, termed
braking impulse , should  be consider ed during COD, deceler ation,
and agility maneuv ers. The amount of impulse required to change
momentum effectively and efficiently is a direct reflect ion of the
physical requirements for COD. For example, as the angle of
directional change required typical ly increases or the entry velocity
into the COD increases, so does the impulse required to change
momentum and deflect the center of mass; therefore, it is physical ly
more demanding to perform such activities. Further , the time
restraints placed on a performer due to the perceptual-cogni tive
aspects of agility can influence the physical demands by limiting the
time available to produce the required force (and impulse) to
successfully change dir ection in r esponse to a stimulus.
Speed requires the ability to accelerate and reach
maximal velocity, whereas agility performance requires
the use of perceptual-cognitive ability in combin ation
with the ability to decelerate, change direction, and
then reaccelerate in an intended direction.
1407
Neurophysiological Basis for Speed
Sprinting, agility, and COD are all dynamic displa ys of force
production in the athletic setting. Because strength and condi tioning
professionals are often asked to assist in the development of these
competi tively advantageous qualities, an overview of how these
force measur es are produced during mo vement is w arranted.
Nervous System
Neuromuscular function is vital to sprint performance because the
activity and the interaction of the central nervous system with the
muscles ultimately influence the rate and strength of muscle
contraction. Resear ch has shown that the combination of strength,
plyometric, and sprint training produces several adaptat ions within
the neuromuscular system that may contribute to improved sprint
performance. Resistance training enhances neural drive, the rate and
amplitude of impulses being  sent from the nervous system to the
target muscles (1). Increases  in neural drive, which are indicativ e of
an increase in the rate at which action potentials occur, are related
to increases in both muscula r force production and the rate of force
production. Similarly, plyometric training demonstr ates increases in
excitability of high-thr eshold  motor neurons. Increased excitability
ultimately enhances neural drive to the muscle. Taken together ,
increases in neural drive may contribute to increases in the athlete’ s
RFD and impulse gener ation.
Stretch-Shortening  Cycle
Many functional tasks begin with preparatory countermo vements
involving spring-l ike actions referred to as the stretch-shortening
cycle (SSC) —an eccentric –concentric coupl ing phenomenon in
which muscle– tendon comple xes are rapidly and forcibly lengthened,
or stretch loaded, and immediately shortened in a reactiv e or elastic
manner , resulting in enhanced concentric force production.
Practical ly speaking, the SSC is demonstr ated in movements in which
1408
a rapid transition from an eccentric action to a concentric action
occurs. Therefore, SSC actions are particularly prevalent in sports
involving running, jumping, directional changes, and other explosiv e
changes in velocity; thus reactiv e strength development is a highly
important quality to develop in training programs and can be a
distinct capabi lity that is independent of maximal strength in elite
athletes (45, 55, 56, 82, 83, 91, 98, 112).
SSC actions exploi t intrinsic muscle–tendon behavior as well as
the force and length reflex feedback to the nervous system  (3, 4, 10,
18, 33). Acutely , SSC actions  tend to increase mechanical efficiency
and impulse via elastic energy recovery, whereas chronical ly, they
upregulate muscle stiffness and enhance neuromuscular activation
(45, 55, 56, 82, 83).
Training activities aimed at improving SSC performance should
fulfill two cri teria (47 , 82, 83, 91, 98):
They should involve skillful, multijoint movements that
transmi t forces through the kinetic chain and exploi t elastic –
reflexiv e mechanisms.
To manage fatigue and emphasiz e work quality and technique,
they should be structur ed around brief work bouts or clusters
separ ated b y frequent r est pauses.
In practice, a combination of progressive plyometric and heavy
resistance methods can accompl ish these objectiv es (i.e., complex or
contrast training).
Spring–Mass Model
Exposur e to strength and speed training may be linked to a rise in
the preactiv ation of the musculatur e used in sprinting (54, 56). The
onset of pre-tension may be related to an increase in the sensitivity
of associated muscle spindle s. The improvement in the time needed
for feedback from muscle spindles results in greater muscle stiffness
and tendon compl iance (54, 58, 79). This physiological condi tion
provides support to the SSC, which underpins the spring–mass
1409
model (SMM) . The SMM (figure 20.3) is a mathematical model that
depicts sprinti ng as a type of human locomotion in which the
displacement of a body mass is the aftereffect from energy produced
and is delivered through the collective coiling and extension of
spring-l ike actions within muscle architectur e (11, 29, 37, 39).
During a complete running cycle, one spring compr esses and propels
the sprinter ’s body forward. Simul taneously , the other spring swings
forward in pr eparation f or ground contact.
FIGURE 20.3 A simple spring– mass model relative to the ground reaction force during
the stance phase of a sprint. During the stance phase, the model demonstr ates how the leg
(represented as a spring) is uncompr essed at initial contact and then is compr essed
(represented by the change in length of the spring) during midstance or as vertical ground
reaction f orce incr eases.
Reprinted by permission from K.P. Clark and P.G. Weyand, “Are Running Speeds Maximized With Simple-Spring Stance
Mechanics?” Journal of Applied Physiology 117, no. 6 (2014): 605.
Within an upright sprint, compression of the spring begins at foot
strike, resulting in horizontal braking forces. This sudden and brief
deceler ation assists in propelling the swing leg forward in
preparation for the subseque nt step. As the center of mass moves
ahead of the foot, the sprinter is in midstance. Within the SMM, the
spring is compr essed to the lowest point, which coincides with a
lower ed center of mass at midstance. Finally, the model describes
1410
the push-of f segment of the stance phase as the return of energy
through the extension of the coiled spring. This resultant energy and
return of f orce projects the sprinter f orward.
While the SMM provides a conceptual framework for highlighting
the actions involved in upright high-speed running, recent
investigations suggest that the model’ s ability to describe the stance
phase of elite sprinters is limited. As illustrated in figure 20.2 on
page 640, during the maximal- velocity phase, elite sprinters tend to
deviate from a classic SMM by producing much of their vertical force
in the first half of a ground contact. In contrast, most non-el ite
sprinters, such as those involved in many team or field-based sports,
displa y stance phases that are described by the SMM (24), where
the vertical force curve is more symmetrical, as shown in figure 20.3.
As such, the SMM should be used as a means to describe the
relationship between the SSC, muscle stiffness, and sprinting. In
fact, as stride frequency increases at a given running speed, one of
the most important features of the leg spring is an increase in
muscle sti ffness (39).
Because sprinting requires an athlete to move at high
speeds, stren gth and conditioning professionals should
emphasize the prescription of exercises that have been
shown to increase neural drive while overlo ading
musculature of the hip, knee, and ankle regions involved
in the SSC.
Additional Neurophysiological
Considerations for COD and Agility
Development
In addition to the neurophysiological aspects of speed performance
previously discussed, other factors must be consider ed regarding
COD and agility performance . During the plant phase, depicted in
figure 20.4, the length of ground contact time of either an agility
1411
(0.23-0.25 s) (7) or a COD movement (~0.15-0.6 s dependent on
angle) (8, 49, 64, 36) exceeds the typical ground contact time of
both the acceleration phase  of sprinting (0.17-0.2 s) (4) and the
maximal- velocity phase of sprinting (0.09-0.11 s) (104, 105). In the
context of COD, as the intended angle of direction change (i.e.,
deflection of center of mass)  increases, the ground contact time of
the main execution plant foot typical ly increases, attributed to the
greater braking force, negativ e work (i.e., knee flexion), and
deceler ation demands associated when having to reduce momentum
with sharper directional changes (36). As a result, this prolongs the
contact time to increase braking impulse to reduce momentum along
the original direction followed by propulsiv e impulse to enable
acceleration toward the new intended direction of travel. In view of
this, COD actions <45 degrees gener ally can be consider ed fast SSC
activities, whereas direction changes >45 degrees gener ally can be
consider ed slower SSC activities, though this depends on entry
velocity and an athlete’ s physical capaci ty (36).
1412
FIGURE 20.4 Plant phase, termed  stance phase in the context of sprinting, of a COD
movement. This is the point in a COD movement that represents the transition between the
deceler ation step and the acceleration step and is the main step in achieving deflection of
the center of mass. Body positioning and the ability to maintain strong trunk positions
during the deceler ation of momentum and reorientation of the body to run in a new
direction ar e critical f or perf ormance.
Since effective braking is an important part of agility performance
(83, 84), neuromuscular development with respect to high-velocity
and high-f orce eccentric muscle actions should be consider ed, for
two reasons. First, the adaptations or motor unit recruitment
pathways called on during an eccentric muscle action are different
than those called on during concentric contractions (38). Secondly ,
the adaptation s to eccentric training appear to be specific to the
velocity of eccentric loading (74). In addition, training athletes for
effective agility performance requires knowledge of perceptual-
cogni tive demands over and above the neurophysiological
requirements for changing direction. Not only are the perceptual-
cogni tive dema nds on athletes related to their abilities in the areas
of visual search scanning, anticipation, decision making, and reaction
1413
time (87) but also the tactical situation (offensive vs. defensive)
changes the br ain pr ocessing str ategy r equired (93, 96).
The training required to improve agility becomes clearer as one
begins to understand the various demands required for COD and
agility with respect to neurophysiological factors, including the SSC,
eccentric muscle action neuromuscular training, and implications of
the length of time or the demand of the COD maneuv er on the SMM.
Further , neurophysiological requirements of agility performance
extend beyond physical requirements to perceptua l-cogni tive
requirements that ar e speci fic to the tactical si tuation.
1414
Running Speed
Sprinting  is a series of coupled flight and support phases, known as
strides  (e.g., right foot contact to next right foot contact, essential ly
comprised of two steps—righ t to left, left to right), orchestr ated in
an attempt to displace the athlete’ s body down the track at maximal
acceleration or velocity (or both), usually over brief distances and
durations. Sprinting has been described as rapid, unpaced, maximal-
effort running of 15 seconds or less (78). Howev er, the classic
defini tion of sprint speed concerns the relationship between step
length  (distance between the toe and heel of two consecutiv e
footsteps) and step frequen cy (or rate; number of steps per
second) (63). For clarity, one stride is equal to two steps (right to
left, then left to right).
Based on this understanding, sprint speed can be increased by an
increase in step length or an increase in step frequency (figure
20.5). Although these changes in performance variables are logical,
the underlying component to maximizing step length and step
frequency is r elated to r apid f orce production.
FIGURE 20.5  Step length–f requency inter action as a f unction of running v elocity.
Adapted from Dillman (1975).
1415
The differences between elite and novice sprinters can be traced
to a single component. Much of the current literature on sprinting
(17, 105, 106) suggests that the amount of vertical force applied to
the ground during the stance phase at top speed may be the most
critical component to improving top speed. In addition, these greater
forces must be appl ied to the gr ound in the shortest period possible.
Application of force is neede d to displace a mass. In sprinting,
step length represents the displacement of mass. Elite male sprinters
achiev e a step length of 2.70 m (8.9 ft), whereas novice sprinters
displa y a step length of 2.56 m (8.4 ft) at maximum velocity (figure
20.6a) (62).
Since contact with the ground is needed to continue force
production and subsequent alterations in velocity, increasing the step
frequency theoretically would maximiz e the time available to produce
force. Elite male sprinters demonstr ate step frequency near 4.63
steps per second compar ed to novice sprinters, who produce a
lesser step frequency of 4.43 steps per second (figure 20.6b) (62).
In other words, elite sprinte rs need less ground contact time with
each step to exert the effort needed to displace their mass due to
their ability to create greater impulses. Thus, these faster sprinters
also spend more time in the air. Interestingly , elite sprinters displa y
times to reposition the swing leg that are similar to those of their
slower counterparts (62, 106).
1416
FIGURE 20.6  Step length  (a) and step r ate (b) in sprinters wi th varying qual ifications.
Data from Mann (2011).
Although the time required for staging the subsequent ground
contact is similar between elite and novice sprinters, elite sprinters
are able to propel themselv es farther down the track due to properly
directed vertica l forces. Mann (62) suggests that these vertical forces
are better directed toward the track due to an optimiz ed knee height
at maximal flexion of the recovering leg. This higher knee position
provides a greater time period for force production and subsequent
ground clearance (i.e., range of motion force movement principle).
This technical advantage may be further evidence for why elite
sprinters tend to produce most of their force within the first half of
the stance phase.
Additional ly, faster sprinters are able to achiev e higher velocities
through the continuous application of high forces in a short stance
phase, which results in longe r steps or steps occurring at a higher
rate. Within the elite setting (e.g., 100 m world championship
finalists), this results in male sprinters achieving velocities between
11.0 meters per second and 12.5 meters per second (24.6-28.0
mph) (46). Conversely , team sport athletes gener ally achiev e
maximum velocities of approximately 8.0 to 9.5 meters per second
(17.9-21.3 mph) (25). While force production is arguably the limiting
1417
factor, technical efficiency and properly designed training also limit
sprint speed.
Sprint speed is determined by an athlete’s step length
and step frequency; more successful sprinters tend to
have longer step lengths as a result of properly directed
forces into the ground while also demonstrating a more
frequent step rate. These findings suggest that RFD and
proper biomechanics are two of the primary limiting
factors influencing sprint performance.
Sprinting Technique Guidelines
Linear sprintin g is composed of a series of subtasks that can be
divided into the start, acceleration (figure 20.7), and top speed
(figure 20.8). While these phases of a sprint are technical ly distinct,
they all require the athlete to volitional ly move the lower limbs at
maximal speed s through a series of stance and flight phases. The
stance phase can be broken down further into a braking period
followed by a propulsiv e period. In contrast, the flight phase consists
of the recovery  and ground preparation  (i.e., late swing)
segments of the swing leg.
1418
FIGURE 20.7 Sprinting technique during the initial acceleration (i.e., the start) and the
acceleration, touchdown, midstance, and tak eoff of subsequent steps.
1419
FIGURE 20.8 Sprinting techniq ue at maximum velocity includes the toe-of f, maximal
vertical pr ojection (MVP), touchdown/midstance, and subsequent toe-of f phases.
Figure 20.9 is a sprint technique checkl ist that accompanies
figures 20.7 and 20.8. These recommendations are based on linear
sprinting and may be useful for both instruction and evaluation of
1420
the movements. Figure 20.10  on page 649 describes the
fundamental mo vements oc curring in maximum- velocity sprinting.
Technical Errors and Coaching
Table 20.1 highlights many common sprinting errors as well as
possible causes and coaching corrections. Quite often, these errors
are the result of the misappl ication of forces due to improper
coaching cues, insufficient mobility, or disruption to an athlete’ s
normal gait caused by external interference. For instance, an athlete
may demonstr ate overstriding due to a coaching drill (such as
reaching to successiv ely longer marks along the track to gain speed)
or the belief that acutely increasing step length will allow one to
catch up to a competi tor in a race. Regardless of the reason, the aim
of strength and condi tioning professionals should be to promote an
athlete’ s speed  through the proper transmission of forces into the
ground that wi ll optimiz e the athlete’ s gait cycle.
Figure 20.9  Sprinting technique checklist: start,
acceleration, and maximum velocity.
Start
The athlete should attempt to distribu te a balanced body weight through a
set position (blocks, three- or four-point stagger ed start) that uses segment
angles critical to produce forces necessary to deliver explosiv e forces from
the start.
Front lower leg angle should be appr oximately 90 degr ees.
Rear lower leg angle should be appr oximately 120 to 135 degr ees.
Aggressive extensio n of the hip, knee, and ankle of the front leg against the
block or gr ound should be observ ed.
After initially extend ing at the hip and knee, the rear leg should then
be rapidly flexed at the hip (to ~90 degrees), knee (to ~90 degrees),
and ankle (to neutral position) in preparation for foot contact of the
first step .
As the rear leg is driven forward, the opposi te arm should also drive
forward, mirroring the range of motion and timing of the rear leg. The
range of motion at the shoulder of each arm is lar ge.
1421
The head should be neutral, looking a few yards or meters ahead along the
track.
Acceleration
Posture
Forward inclination helps maximiz e propulsiv e force contribution and
depends on the absolute magni tude of force available. The forward lean
gradual ly reduces with each step, assuming an upright position by maximum
velocity.
The pelvis posi tion should be neutr al relative to torso .
The center of mass should be ahead of the foot during early acceleration
(first few steps), which gradual ly progresses to the center of mass being
slightly behind the f oot as the athlete pr ogresses to maximum v elocity.
The center of mass and hip position begin low and rise higher with each
step f rom early to late ac celeration to maximum v elocity.
Arms
The ranges of motion in the arms are wide to match the ranges of motion in
the lower body on the contralater al side (e.g., as the knee travels forward,
the opposi te arm tr avels forward).
The arms ar e driv en aggr essively backw ard.
Legs
During acceleration each step gets progressively longer , with ground contact
times getting shorter and flight times longer as the athlete advances to
maximum v elocity.
Rapid, large split of the thighs through the stance phase enhances leg
extension force while preparing the swing limb for rapid acceleration back
down to the ground, enabl ing high ground reaction forces (GRF) early
during gr ound contact.
Low heel recovery enables shorter steps and more cycle time dedicated to
force production. Heel recovery gains more height as the athlete progresses
to maximum v elocity.
The path of the heel and rest of the foot tends to be piston like (backw ard
and down ward) before progressing to a more cyclic action by maximum
velocity.
Forward-oriented shin angles gradual ly become more vertical as the athlete
progresses to maximum v elocity.
There should be rapid deceler ation of extending the thigh (back -side catch)
during the late stance to avoid prolonging ground contact and then enable
rapid subsequent r ecovery of the leg after tak eoff.
1422
The thigh forcefully retracts during the late swing to enable foot contact
behind the center of mass, enhanc ing production and direction (more
horizontal) of GRFs early in gr ound contact.
The foot and ankle maintain optimal stiffness. A stable foot position during
the early stance helps provide the foundation for the hip extensors to
contribute more effectively to forward propulsion while enabl ing storage and
release of elastic ener gy at the ankle.
Maximum Velocity
Posture
Slight forward lean
Head in neutr al posi tion looking tow ard intended dir ection of tr avel
High neutr al pelvis posi tion
Arms
Arm action  mirrors the contralater al limb (i.e., when the touchdown leg is in
its longest position the opposi te arm will be in its most open position to
balance the body).
The hand is driven hard down below  the waist on the downstr oke and
returns to the height of the athlete’ s chin with a more acute angle at the
elbow (appr oximately 90 degr ees on the r eturn).
Arms should not cr oss the midl ine of the body .
Legs
With a slight flex of the knee at takeoff, the hip is in a hyperextended
position and the ankle is plantar flex ed.
After toe-of f, the knee should flex and the ankle dorsiflex (passiv e folding)
as the thigh flexes forward at the hip to a high knee position. A high heel
recovery wher eby the f oot steps o ver the opposi te knee should be observ ed.
With the knee at its highest point (front-side catch), the tibia should be in a
high forward position, providing space for rearward acceleration of the thigh
to help gener ate lar ger ini tial GRFs during support.
The foot should travel down and back (negativ e foot speed before
touchdown).
The foot should touch down close to underneath the center of mass (will be
slightly in front). At touchdown the opposi te knee should be beside or
slightly in f ront of the knee of the touchdown leg.
During support, knee and ankle flexion should be minimal.
In the late stance (back -side catch), early hip flexor activation helps avoid
prolonged ground contact and deceler ates the extending limb, preventing
lower leg recovery behind the body after toe-of f (too much back-side
1423
mechanics), providing more optimal leg recovery (better timing and
improved front side posi tion).
Efficient rapid switching of limb positions requires efficient timing, enabled
by rapid switching  off of key muscles; thus, relaxation and rhythm are
essential to enable optimal timing and coordination and reduce energy
demands.
Adapted f rom Mann (2011).
Training Goals
The overarching goal of sprinting is to achiev e optimal step length
and step frequency through the correct application of force into the
ground. The transmission of high forces must occur within a short
stance phase,  also known as ground contac t time. During the
acceleration phase, propulsiv e forces assist in elevating the hips
above the ground to a point at which speed is no longer increasing
at large rates. This portion of the sprint, known as maximum
velocity, uses the SSC (through stiffness regulation) to propel the
athlete’ s center of mass down the tr ack horiz ontally.
Figure 20.10  Fundamental movements occurring in
maximum-velocity sprinting.
Early Flight
Eccentric hip flexion.  Deceler ates backw ard rotation of the thigh
Eccentric knee extension.  Deceler ates backw ard rotation of the leg and f oot
Eccentric ankle dorsi flexion.  Deceler ates ankle plantar flexion
Midflight
Concentric hip flexion.  Accelerates thigh f orward
Eccentric knee extension  followed b y eccentric knee flexion
Concentric ankle dorsiflexion.  Assists in reducing the limbs’ mome nt of
inertia
Late Flight
Concentric hip extension.  Rotates the thigh backw ard in preparation for foot
contact
1424
Eccentric knee flexion.  Accelerates the leg backw ard, limiting knee
extension; stops before foot strike (aided by concentric knee flexion to
minimiz e braking at touchdown)
Ankle in neutral position (avoid plantar flexed position).  Preparation for
ground contact to reduce Achilles’ tendon complex slack at touchdown to
optimiz e stor age of elastic ener gy during early support
Early Support
Continued concentr ic hip extension.  Minimiz es the braking effect of the foot
strike
Brief concentric knee flexion followed by eccentric knee extension.  Absorbs
the landing and facilitates power transfer from the hip to the ankle during
propulsion
Eccentric plantar flexion.  Stores potential elastic energy for subsequent
release to f acilitate gr eater pr opulsion during late support
Late Support
Eccentric hip flexion.  Deceler ates backw ard thigh rotation; rotates the trunk
in preparation f or forward takeoff
Concentric knee extension.  Propels the center of gr avity forward
Concentric plantar flexion.  Aids in pr opulsion
Based on B ezodis et al. (2008); Putnam and K ozey (1989); W ood (1987).
TABLE 20.1  Common Sprinting Technique Errors,
Causes, and Corrections
Error Cause Coaching recommendations
START AND ACCELERATION
Hips ar e too high in
start of cr ouch posi tion.Misunderstanding
of setupInstruct athlete to space f eet by 1.5 to 2
foot lengths, then lower into starting
position b y dropping the shin of the back
leg to be par allel with sprint surf ace.
The athlete is stepping
out later ally during the
initial driv e phase.Improper
distribution of
forcesInstruct the athlete to push or driv e
through the gr ound to ini tiate the sprint.
*See sprint dri lls 1 to 6 on pages 675-683 .
1425
Error Cause Coaching recommendations
The athlete’ s arm
movement is
abnormal ly short and
tight.Misunderstanding
of natur al arm
swingInstruct the athlete to ei ther (a) driv e the
elbow down and back or (b) pul l the hands
down and back to simulate pul ling on a
rope. I n addi tion, cue the athlete to al low
the hands to f ully break the w aist whi le also
allowing the arms to r ecover at midl ine of
the body (in visible l ine from nose thr ough
navel).
The athlete is holding
unnecessary tension in
dorsal muscles and
hyperextending the
neck.Misunderstanding
of mo vementInstruct the athlete to k eep the head in l ine
with the spine; the torso and head should
rise at the same r ate during the
acceleration and tr ansition phases of the
sprint.
The athlete jumps the
first step or steps o ver
the knee of the stance
leg.Push-of f angle too
high; upw ard
thrust too steepInstruct the athlete to ini tiate mo vement b y
driving thr ough the gr ound and al low the
swing leg to horiz ontally cut the stance leg
shin (i.e. , ankle cr ossover), rather than
stepping o ver the stance leg (i.e. , knee
crossover). In addi tion, cue the athlete to
keep the f oot of the swing leg close to the
ground to set up a pr oper ac celeration
phase.
The athlete gets into an
upright postur e
prematur ely.Inadequate push-
off force; impr oper
carriage of headInstruct the athlete to continue pushing
into the gr ound whi le maintaining a natur al
trunk lean. Also cue the athlete to k eep the
head in l ine wi th the spine; l ifting the head
may result in a sudden l ifting of the torso ,
ultimately minimizing ac celeration pat terns.
MAXIMUM VELOCITY
The athlete is
superficial ly attempting
to maintain an
acceleration phase
when the shins ar e
clearly v ertical.Improper
understanding of
movement
patternsInstruct the athlete that as the shins and
hips come up to v ertical, so should the
torso and head. Encour age the athlete to
feel for the rise in the hips so that the joints
(shoulders to hips to ankles) sta y stack ed
or in l ine. This posi tion al lows f or the
proper tr ansmission of f orces into the
running surf ace.
*See sprint dri lls 1 to 6 on pages 675-683 .
1426
Error Cause Coaching recommendations
The athlete is not
displa ying optimal
front-side mechanics
with regard to the
height of the swing leg
knee.Inadequate f orce
production and hip
mobilityRecall that the swing leg’ s knee height
(traditional ly called front-side mechanics ) is
influenced b y GRFs and hip mobi lity.
Improperly cueing an athlete to l ift the
knees ma y result in further impr oper
transmission of f orces and ul timately
change the musculatur e natur ally used
during the sprint ev ent.
The athlete is
overstriding.Misunderstanding
of force appl icationSuccess in sprint ev ents r esults from the
ability to pr oduce high v ertical f orces in a
short amount of time. An o verstriding
athlete is at tempting to incr ease speed via
larger gr ound contact times, which
ultimately dampens the ef fects of the
stretch-shortening cy cle and lowers step
frequency . Instruct athletes to run in their
lane and maintain their natur al gai t cycle.
The athlete is
displa ying chr onic
hamstring injury or
pain.Insufficient
mobility; impr oper
positioning of
pelvisA high l ikelihood of hamstring injury oc curs
during the sprint ev ent’s swing phase due
to eccentric (lengthening) f orces or
overstriding. An athlete is f urther
compr omised when displa ying anterior
pelvic ti lt during the sprint ev ent. R educe
anterior pelvic ti lt with appr opriate
development of back -side and f ront-side
mechanics thr ough appr opriate sprint
drills.*
The athlete is
attempting to cy cle the
leg action, r esulting in
an incr eased time to
complete the swing
phase. This is made
appar ent by the open
gap between the knees
during the stance
phase.Improper f orce
applicationInstruct the athlete to driv e the f oot down
and back into the tr ack, not pa w. Due to
the seemingly horiz ontal mo vement of the
foot during a sprint, coaches often miscue
athletes to pa w the f oot into the tr ack.
Pawing the f oot horiz ontally against the
track pr events the athlete f rom using
vertical f orces, o verloading the str etch-
shortening cy cle to mo ve down the tr ack.
Integration of appr opriate sprint dri lls*
should help dev elop the corr ect leg action.
The athlete is
displa ying err oneousImproper
understanding ofWhile traditional ly coaches would claim that
erratic arm mo vement is a symptom of
*See sprint dri lls 1 to 6 on pages 675-683 .
1427
Error Cause Coaching recommendations
arm mo vement in the
transverse plane.movement pat tern fatigue, much l iterature suggests that
speed is l imited by mechanical f orce
application, not metabol ic efficiency .
Therefore, athletes should emphasiz e
driving the arms down and back whi le
maintaining an upright torso . In addi tion,
strength and condi tioning pr ofessionals
should r ecommend to the athlete that the
arm swing r ecovers near the midl ine of the
body to tak e adv antage of the
glenohumer al joint ’s natur al range of
motion.
*See sprint dri lls 1 to 6 on pages 675-683 .
The following fundamental training objectiv es regarding
performance enhancement and injury prevention should be
consider ed during the dev elopment of speed in pr actical set tings:
Emphasiz e brief ground support times as a means of achieving
rapid step rate. As previously mentioned, this requires high
levels of ballistic strength. This quality is developed
systematical ly through consistent exposur e to speed training
as wel l as pr operly designed r esistance tr aining pr ograms.
Emphasiz e the further development of the SSC as a means to
increase the amplitude of impulse for each step of the sprint.
Specifically, high achiev ers at top-speed sprinting produce high
forces in a shorter stance phase using the SSC. The complete
weightl ifting movements and their derivatives are key
exercises for overloading the SSC with forces greater than
those produced during an open sprint, in addition to
plyometric training, which can induce high-impact stretch
loads to enhance S SC function and r eactiv e strength.
Because sprinting requires an athlete to move at high
speeds, stren gth and conditioning professionals should
emphasize the prescription of exercises that span the
1428
load–velocity curve while overloading musculature of
the hip, knee, and ankle regions involved in the SSC.
1429
Methods of Developing Speed
From a practical standpoint, the demonstr ation of maxim al speed is
the result of well-organized programming that organical ly develops
and matures the required skill sets within the athlete. This organic
approach to sprint training results from a schema of development
that is based on the emphasis and de-emphasis of certain qualities,
such as acceleration and maximum velocity, within each training
phase. Furthermor e, the training plan should coordinate these
singular qualities through phasic progression. A well-constructed
training plan highlights specific components that will assist in fully
maximizing an athlete’ s movement potential.
Sprinting
Although a variety of training stimul i are importan t for the
optimization of athletic performance, it can be argued that no
exercise improves running velocity more than maximu m-velocity
sprinting (i.e., primary methods). An athlete’ s sprint prowess
depends on the gener ation of high forces in short time periods (62,
105). Neurological adaptatio ns resulting from long-ter m training
plans that emphasiz e maximal strength and movement velocity
improve both RFD and impulse gener ation (1, 100). In the strength
and condi tioning setting, weightlifting movements and jump training
are prescribed to develop RFD and impulse at varying loads, because
these movements use the SSC (i.e., tertiary methods). Similarly,
upright sprint ing uses the SSC, defining it as a plyometric
movement. Chronic exposur e to movements eliciting the SSC can
increase muscle stiffness, which is a potential physiological
advantage f or sprint abi lity (39).
In addition, sprinting requires near-maximum to maximum  muscle
activation, which depends on high central nervous system activity.
Therefore, chronic exposur e to sprinting may lead to improvements
in musculosk eletal control via the central nervous system. This would
result in a cyclical dose–r esponse relationship , because
1430
neurophysiological adaptations from previous practices would bolster
subsequent training. In an effort to either enhance the force
required or target potential neuromuscular adaptations for sprinting
improvement, resisted and assisted sprint training techniques are
often emplo yed (i.e., secondary methods). The proposed benefi ts,
potential drawbacks, and coaching consider ations are outlined in
table 20.2 .
Strength
As noted throughout the chapter , sprint speed is underpinned by an
athlete’ s ability to produce large forces within brief time periods.
These forces must be large enough to support the body weight in
the presence of gravity and displace the body through an increase in
velocity (62). Thus, many strength and condi tioning professionals
are aware of the importance of resistance training in the
development of a sprint -based athlete. Centr al to the discussion of
resistance training is how best to transfer newly developed strength
qualities from the weight room to the track or field (109). The
transfer of strength improvements to sprinting may require an
emphasis on the specificity of training (i.e., dynamic
correspondence  and coordinative overload ). This transfer of
training effect deals with the degree of performance adaptation and
may result from the similarities between the movement patterns,
peak force, RFD, acceleration, and velocity patterns of an exercise
and the sporting en vironment (98).
While training for maximal strength may be beneficial, training
should emphasiz e agendas that merge maximal strength and speed–
strength qualities instead (44). The selection of exercises and
movements that provide opportuni ties to displa y forces and
velocities like those found in sprinting may have the most benefi t
with regard to enhancing rate coding and firing frequency , alongside
alterations to type II muscle fibers such as cross-sectiona l area and
fascicle length (40, 43). For instance, evidence suggests that
weightl ifting movements and their derivatives such as the clean,
1431
snatch, and mid-thigh pulls may enhance sprint performance
through physiological adaptations such as muscular stiffness,
enhanced RFD, and coactiv ation of the musculatur e surrounding the
hips and knees (6, 26, 32).
Mobility
While not a kinetic variable, soft tissue manipulation is a commonly
used practice in the development of speed athletes. Strength and
condi tioning professionals and athletic trainers rely on tools such as
stretching, chiropractic care, massage, and myofascial release to
achiev e optimal mobility within the dynamic state. Mobility is the
freedom of an athlete’ s limb to move through a desired range of
motion, whereas flexibi lity is a joint’s total range of motion. With an
understanding that positional characteristics are among several
limiting factors in performance, strength and condi tioning
professionals should ensur e that proper postur al integri ty is in place
before the onset of pr actice or competi tion.
TABLE 20.2  Assistance and Resistance Training for
Speed Development
Type of
trainingExample
exercise
modalitiesPotential
benefitsPotential
disadvantagesPractical use
suggestions
Note:  SSC = str etch-shortening cy cle.
1432
Type of
trainingExample
exercise
modalitiesPotential
benefitsPotential
disadvantagesPractical use
suggestions
Assistance
training
(e.g.,
overspeed
training)Inclusiv e of
modal ities
such as r ope
towing,
bungee cor d
pulls, or
downhi ll
running wi th
the intention
of allowing
the athlete to
run at
supramaximal
speedsTheor etically,
these tr aining
tools ar e used
to potential ly
expose the
athlete to
higher
velocities than
one can
achiev e in
unassisted
sprinting b y
inducing an
increased step
or stride r ate
and exposing
the athlete to
higher hip
angular
velocities (46).
This incr eased
step r ate is
hypothesiz ed
to have
potential f or
neuromuscular
adaptations to
increase
maximal sprint
velocity.
Increases in
overspeed
should be
limited to
≤10%.Assisted sprinting
may prematur ely
rush an athlete’ s
stance phase,
thus r emoving
time needed to
exert optimal
forces, and has
been shown to
result in
decreased muscle
activation and
propulsiv e force
production in
comparison to
maximal running
(66). Ther efore,
what can be
described as
chop steps ma y
be observ ed.
Undesir able
techniques such
as leaning back
and o verstriding
may be pr esent
in a pr otectiv e
manner to br ake,
which is
suboptimal.
Exercises that
rely on the
towing of
athletes ma y
increase br aking
forces in
comparison to
maximal running
(66) as athletes
attempt toTop-speed
sprinting should
be dev eloped
through mor e
natural and
safer training
tools that
consider an
athlete’ s training
status and
support optimal
biomechanics.
Strength and
condi tioning
professionals
should car efully
assess the
implications of
assistance
modal ities
before
implementation
and these
modal ities ma y
be best used
when working
with adv anced
or elite athletes.
Note:  SSC = str etch-shortening cy cle.
1433
Type of
trainingExample
exercise
modalitiesPotential
benefitsPotential
disadvantagesPractical use
suggestions
tolerate velocities
they cannot
naturally create
or accommodate
because of
biomechanical
efficiency ,
training state, or
both.
Downhi ll sprinting
may expose the
athlete to
unnecessary
eccentric f orces
through a
modified stance
leg that r esults
from ha ving to
find the gr ound.
This ma y also
affect the S SC,
which is
optimiz ed
through the f oot
placement
occurring just in
front of the
center of mass
on ground
contact in flat -
surface upright
sprinting (66).
To date, v ery
little resear ch
supports the
implementation
of overspeed
training, because
sprint suc cess
results from an
Note:  SSC = str etch-shortening cy cle.
1434
Type of
trainingExample
exercise
modalitiesPotential
benefitsPotential
disadvantagesPractical use
suggestions
athlete’ s ability to
produce lar ge
forces in a short
ground contact
time.
Resistance
sprintingInclusiv e of
training
modal ities
such as sled
towing, sled
pushing, wind
resistance,
incline
sprinting, and
sled pushing
with the
intention of
improving an
athlete’ s
accelerative
abilitiesAccentuates
the
biomechanics
of the
acceleration
phase b y
placing the
athlete in a
position that
promotes
lower ed torso
(i.e., forward
trunk lean),
hips, and shin
angles.
Resisted
sprinting ma y
optimiz e an
athlete’ s ability
to cover short
distances
quickly b y
overloading the
acceleration
phase,
resulting in
ground contact
times that
produce higher
propulsiv e
forces.
Improving
acceleration,
which is a
change inSprint ef forts
against a load
that is too gr eat
may lead to
longer gr ound
contact times in
addition to
shorter step
lengths that ar e
not task speci fic
(59).
Slopes of incl ine
that ar e too gr eat
may modi fy
proper sprinting
biomechanics,
resulting in a
rehearsal of
improper
technique and
thus l imiting
transfer of
training ef fect.
Sled pushing ma y
alter the natur al
sprinting gai t
cycle due to the
removal of arm
action that
synchr onizes and
counterbalances
the leg action
occurring at the
hip.Strength and
condi tioning
professionals
and athletes
attempting to
improve the
acceleration
phase of a sprint
may adopt
resistance
training
modal ities that
maintain normal
biomechanics
involved in
unresisted
sprints.
Loads should be
chosen based on
the sporting
context whi le
also considering
the athlete’ s
physical status.
For instance,
track and field
sprinters ma y
use loads that
do not decr ease
running v elocity
by mor e than
10% to 12% (2,
49, 52, 61).
In contr ast, field
sport athletes
Note:  SSC = str etch-shortening cy cle.
1435
Type of
trainingExample
exercise
modalitiesPotential
benefitsPotential
disadvantagesPractical use
suggestions
velocity, may
lead to an
increase in top
speed thr ough
enhanced RFD .
Resisted sprints
and loads, and
velocity
decrements,
can be
manipulated to
target
technical,
speed–
strength,
power , and
strength–speed
qualities (19,
20).
It ma y offer
specificity to
sporting
scenarios when
athletes need
to push (mo ve)
external mass
such as in
bobsled, rugb y,
and American
footbal l.who o vercome
external
resistance whi le
blocking,
tackling, and
scrimmaging
can use loads
20% to 30% of
body weight to
improve the
initial 5-10 m of
movement (28,
52). Frictional
properties wi ll
influence the
amount of
resistance
experienced,
thus pr escribing
sled pushes and
pulls based on
velocity
decrements is
suggested (19,
20).
Note:  SSC = str etch-shortening cy cle.
Based on the previously described constructs of speed, the
currently accepted model of sprint success is based on the athlete’ s
ability to produce and overcome ground reaction forces in a short
amount of time. Moreover, while these GRFs assist in producing
optimal step length through forward propulsion, the sprinter ’s
position in flight may be limited by insufficient mobility (i.e., reduced
hip flexion restricts subseque nt thigh and knee lift). Specifically, an
1436
athlete may possess the physical characteristics necessary to yield
high rates of force in a short amount of time, but compr omises in a
joint’s freedom of movemen t will result in misplaced forces. The
improper placement of forces due to erroneous ground contact will
result in dampened sprint speed and an increased likelihood for
injury .
1437
Agility Performance and Change-of-
Direction Ability
In both field and court sports, there is a substantial number of
preplanned COD movements as well as changes in direction in
response to the ball, the game, teammates, or opponents. In sports
such as basebal l, softbal l, American footbal l, and basketball, athletes
decide before commencemen t of movement on the path they will
run. Such patterns often including a quick or sudden COD—f or
example, exploding into a sprint out of a shuffle off a base or
running a route before receipt of a ball. Howev er, many sports also
include rapid COD in respons e to teammates, opponents, or tactical
situations (i.e., external stimuli). Such responses can occur in an
offensive or a defensive scenario, and the physical movement and
perceptual-cogni tive aspects of such performances impose different
demands on the athlete. Therefore, one should thoroughly
understand the factors associated with agility performance from a
physical standpoint (COD ability) and in combination with the
perceptual-cogni tive aspects (agi lity).
Athletes improve COD ability through development of
several phys ical factors and technical skills during a
variety of speeds and modes of movement. The
development of agility also requires impr oving
perceptual-cognitive abilities in relation to the demands
of the sport.
Factors Affecting Change of Direction and
Perceptual-Cognitive Ability
It is becoming increasingly clear that the ground contact time and
GRF during the plant phase (figure 20.4 on page 643) of a
movement provide valuable insight into the physical factors that
affect COD performance, while perceptual-cogni tive factors must
1438
also be consider ed regarding agility. COD and agility movements
performed at shallow cutting angles (less than 75 degrees) and
associated with shorter ground contact times (less than 250 ms)
(94) benefi t from training similar to speed training with regard to the
physical dema nds but still require additional perceptua l-cogni tive
training. On the other hand, when a COD involves a more aggressive
cutting angle (equal to or greater than 75 degrees), the length of
ground contact time can often exceed 250 milliseconds (8, 48, 64,
36) due to the greater braking requirements. Therefore, one should
consider increasing emphasis on eccentric strength for braking and
maximal strength alongside the concentric impulsiv eness required
for propulsion during the reacceleration. Additional ly, due to the
eccentric –concentric coupl ing during the plant phase of directional
changes, reactiv e strength development is also a key training priority
(36). Figure 20.11  provides an example of how various requirements
(angle of COD or perceptual-cogni tive requirement of agility) may
affect the GRF and ground contact times of athletes. Of particular
interest is the effect of various methods of changing direction (for
the same angle of direction change) on GRF and ground contact
times. The effect of method of changing direction can be seen in
figure 20.11: The 5-0-5 was performed either with a single-leg COD
(outside leg turn) or with a jump turn that can be performed in a
testing environment but is not commonly performed on the field of
play. Nevertheless, this demonstr ates that the techniq ue chosen
dictates the demands; therefore, if trying to elicit a specific
adaptation f rom an athlete, one should pr ovide speci fic instructions.
1439
FIGURE 20.11  Comparison of ground reaction force and contact times during various
change-of - direction and agi lity maneuv ers.
The test used for assessment of agility performance has an
impact on perceived agility ability of the athlete. A pletho ra of tests
are used to assess “agility,” but tests without a reactiv e aspect
should be consider ed COD tests, and a test that includes a reactiv e
stimulus is now by defini tion a test of agility for most sports. Further ,
the requirements of the test may result in assessment of factors
other than COD ability or perceptual-cogni tive requirements.
Therefore, one must be informed about and critical regarding a test
used to assess “agility” or “change-of -direction ability.” For example,
if the Illinois agility test, often performed with soccer athletes (91),
was used after preseason training, improvements in performance
may be due to improved metabol ic capaci ty and not necessari ly
improved COD ability. This is attributed to the length of the Illinois
test, which imposes a higher metabol ic demand than shorter tests
and thus is mor e representativ e of maneuverability .
Howev er, it should be noted that even similar-length tests such as
the traditional 5-0-5 test, the modified 5-0-5 test (the 5-0-5 without
the initial 10 m run-up), and the L-run used on the same athletes
1440
have only a moderate relationship (41), indicating they are not all
assessing the same type of COD ability or the same underpinning
physical requirements. This becomes more appar ent when one
realizes that some tests require a rapid COD while others require
multiple COD. Tests with multiple COD often require more bending
around an object or cone while maintaining as much velocity as
possible, in comparison to a sharp COD that demand s a rapid
deceler ation (e.g., 5-0-5 test). Therefore, tests such as the Illinois
agility or L-run that require a bend to maintain velocity instead of an
aggressive COD could be consider ed tests of maneuv erability (69).
With this said, table 20.3 gives examples of COD and agility tests
and drills that address different physical requirements within the
realm of “agility.” One should  consider the aspect most important to
the given sport when determining COD and agility abilities and
consider testin g and monitoring various types of COD abilities and
perceptual-cogni tive abilities required during true agility tests.
Furthermor e, tests such as the traditional 5-0-5 may be influenced
by an athlete’ s linear running  speed (70, 81); thus, to isolate COD
ability, the COD deficit (5-0-5 test time—10 m linear sprint time)
could be determined (70, 71). Practitioners may also want to
consider an athlete’ s sprint momentum (average velocity during a
linear sprint test or 10 m approach of the traditional 5-0-5 test ×
athlete’ s mass) to provide an indication of the braking demand
experienced by athletes during the 5-0-5 test to give a more
complete view of the athlete’ s COD abi lity.
TABLE 20.3  Aspects of Agility Tested or Trained in
Various Drills and Tests
Change-of-
direction
speed ManeuverabilityPerceptual-
cognitive
abilityMetabolic
requirementa
(average length of
test or drill)
1441
Change-of-
direction
speed ManeuverabilityPerceptual-
cognitive
abilityMetabolic
requirementa
(average length of
test or drill)
TESTS
Reactiv e
agility tests✓ ✓ <3 s
5-0-5 ✓ <3 s
5-10-5 ✓ <5 s
T-test ✓ ✓ <12 sa
Illinois agi lity ✓ <12 sa
L-run ✓ <6 s
DRILLS
Z-drill ✓ ✓ <5 sb
Y-shaped
agility drill
(generic
stimulus)✓ <5 sb
Y-shaped
agility drill
(speci fic
stimulus)✓ ✓ <5 sb
aThe length of the test has a large influence on the metabol ic requirements and whether
changes in test performance can become a function of enhanced condi tioning instead of
directly r elated to impr ovements in COD or agi lity ability.
bDuration dependen t on distances used within the design of the drill. Howev er, it is
advisable to keep the duration of the drill short to emphasiz e technical execution within the
drill.
Data from Gabbet t et al. (2008); Nimphius et al. (2012); Pauole et al. (2000); Serpell et al.
(2011); Sierer et al. (2008); Vescovi and McGuigan (2008); Vescovi et al. (2011); Young
and F arrow (2013).
Change-of-Direction Ability
As stated earlier, one must understand that an athlete’ s measur ed
COD ability may vary depending on the demand imposed by the
1442
chosen COD test. Therefore, it may be beneficial to choose different
tests that measur e this ability under a high-velocity braking
requirement; with multiple COD; or, as will be discussed, in reaction
to a scenario , opponent, or stimulus. Another consider ation
regarding COD ability is the orientation of the body leading into the
deceler ation, through the transition phase as the athlete comes to a
stop, and then the positioning as he or she subsequently
reaccelerates out of the COD. Therefore, the positioning of the trunk
influences the performance of the COD. As such, it is a combination
of the ability to deceler ate (high braking impulse), reorient the body
to face or partially face the direction of intended travel, and then
reaccelerate (high propulsiv e impulse) over short contact times that
truly determines COD ability. Additional ly, the ability to perform the
COD requires the athlete to have the physical capaci ty to produce
high and rapid magni tudes of force, tolerate the high loads
associated with braking, and adopt favorable postur es that are
associated wi th braking and pr opulsion (22, 35).
Considering the requirement s for rapidly changing momentum,
increased muscle mass in combination with decreased body fat (i.e.,
improving functional mass) has been regarded as a predictor of COD
performance when assessed by the T-test in elite basketball players
(23). Other anthropometrics and their relationship to COD ability are
not discussed here, because aspects such as height and limb length
are not modifiable by the strength and condi tioning professional.
Instead, body center of mass height is related to improved lateral
COD performance (89), and this can be actively targeted during
technique modi fication tr aining (22, 35).
Overall, COD ability among a variety of movement patterns
(various angles  of direction change) has been shown to improve with
increased hip extension velocity (rapid application of force by the hip
extensors), low center of mass height, wide lateral foot plants for
perpendicular force application, increased braking impulse and
propulsiv e impulse, increased knee flexion entering the COD,
minimiz ed trunk angular displacement entering the COD
1443
(deceler ation phase), and increased lateral trunk tilt (during 180-
degree changes) (22, 35, 80, 89, 94, 95, 97). Because the ability to
deceler ate, hold body position, and then reaccelerate is important in
COD tasks as described by the kinetic and kinematic requirements of
faster COD and agility performances, it is clear that a well-rounded
approach to strength development involving dynamic, isometric, and
in particular eccentric strength capaci ties is needed for the
development of better COD performances (51, 97), with training
methods that span the entire load– velocity and force–velocity curve
(42) across multiple lower -limb and trunk segments (35). In contrast
to sprint development, it is recommended that athletes under go
training that allows for the neuromuscular system to effectively
adapt to the rate of loading required during the braking phase, with
the understanding that the neuromuscular requirements for braking
capaci ty must be specifically trained using low- and high-velocity
eccentric muscle actions (38) such as those during drop landings,
landing from a loaded jump, or the catch phase of a power clean or
power snatch , in addition to supramaximal eccentrics that
particularly load the knee extensors. All of these place different
eccentric loading demands on the hips, knees, and ankles (67).
The biomechanical demands of directional changes are
influenced by approach speed and COD angle; thus,
practitioners should manipulate these two variables
cautiously when designing COD and agility activities.
Perceptual-Cognitive Ability
When the physical ability to change direction rapidly is present, one
can focus on the components of perceptual-cogni tive ability that
must be developed to bring together the ability to perform both
physical ly and mental ly on the field of play. There are several
components of perceptual-cogni tive ability: visual scanning,
anticipation, pattern recogni tion, knowledge of the situation,
decision-making time and accuracy, and reaction time (86, 88, 94,
1444
110, 111). Many of these aspects of development are sport specific,
and a compr ehensiv e discus sion is beyond the scope of this text.
Howev er, general drills to help improve these skills are discussed in
the section on methods of dev eloping agi lity.
Technical Guidelines and Coaching
In comp arison to sprinting, COD and agility have a large degree of
freedom due to the multitude of movements that occur during a
COD. Further , agility performance as restricted or determined by
opponents or other tactical restraints and scenarios cannot be
trained through the use of a single technique, with evidence to
suggest we should be creating within- and between-ski ll variabi lity
and a flexibl e coordinativ e approach (35). Nevertheless, the
following ar e some technical guidel ines and coaching suggestions.
Visual Focus
When changing direction in response to an opponent (either
offensive or defensive), the athlete should visual ly scan the
environment and opponent while focusing on the shoulders,
trunk, and hip .
Following the anticipation of the event, unless deception is
intended, the athlete should quickly redirect attention to a new
area to help lead the tr ansition of the body .
Body Position During Braking and Reacceleration
Contr ol the trunk leading into the deceler ation (decrease large
amounts of trunk motion) (80). When deceler ating, posterior
trunk lean ma y assist in orienting the f orce vector posteriorly .
Through the stance phase, reorient the trunk and hips toward
the direction of intended travel to allow for a more effective
reacceleration (22) and to reduce the redirection demands for
a mor e effective posi tion to pr oduce f orce (35).
Just as with acceleration mechanics, body lean is paramount in
allowing proper force application through the ground with
1445
strong alignment of the ankle, knee, and hip to the trunk and
shoulders.
Enter and exit changes in direction with a lower center of
mass to increase stability and to enable a manipulation of the
base of support r elative to the center of mass (89).
Leg Action
Ensur e that the athlete can effectively dissipate or tolerate the
eccentric braking loads through an effective range of motion at
the hip, knee, and ankle (i.e., co-triple flexion) and avoid a
stiff-legged br aking st yle (92, 94).
Emphasiz e a firm base of support for effective push-of f and
manipulation of base of support relative to center of mass
(i.e., wide lateral foot plant when cutting, large anterior foot
placement when turning) while pushing the ground away in
order to enhance performance (i.e., rapid simultaneous triple
extension of ankle, knee, and hip), especial ly while learning in
closed drills. External focus of attention—thr ough instructions
to concentr ate on the ground instead of a body part—has
been shown to impr ove COD perf ormance (76).
Arm Action
Powerf ul arm actions should be used to f acilitate leg driv e.
Ensur e that the action of the arms is not counterpr oductiv e
(i.e., does not cause a decrease in speed or efficiency),
particularly during transitioning between difficult COD (e.g.,
from a backpedal to a sprint) , while keeping the arms close to
the body to reduce the moment of inertia and to increase the
total body r otation v elocities when changing dir ection (35).
Transitional Movements
Expressions of agility can be divided into three phases (21): a
transition  whereby the athlete is in a ready position to read and
subsequently react to a situation that arises; an initiation , a
moment when an athlete initiates or changes movement (e.g., a
1446
COD); this leads to the actualization  phase that involves a sport
skill or sprint to a position. For example, a corner back, when
tracking a wide receiver, may perform a backpedal (transition),
before performing a direction al change (initiation) into a sprint and
then intercepting an undert hrown pass (actual ization). While the
success of this play or other expressions of agility manifest in the
actual ization phase, the preceding phases are just as important and
require good technical execution. Backpedaling  (rearward
locomotion with periods of double limb support and one foot in
contact with the ground between contralater al foot strikes) or
backward running  (rearward locomotion involving single-leg
support throughout foot–ground contact and both feet
simultaneously in the air between foot strikes) (101) may be
performed to displace an athlete rearward while maintaining a
forward visual gaze of an opponent or ball, such as in basketball,
soccer, rugby, and footbal l. The frequency and importance of
differing transitional movements may be sport dependent, and more
resear ch is required in specific sports to develop this understanding
(12, 21). Nevertheless, practitioners should develop their athletes’
ability to perform a variety of transitional movements (e.g., lateral
shuffle, backpedal, crossover running) and to perform sprints from
these transitional movements to develop athletes’ movement
solutions and al l-around ph ysical l iteracy.
Figure 20.12  provides a technique checkl ist for common
transitional movements: the backpedal and side-shuf fle. The
backpedal is an essential locomotiv e skill for a defensive back in
American footbal l. The following drill progression could be used to
develop an athlete’ s backpedal ing technique before integrating the
skill with other actions or agi lity drills:
Backpedal ing for 20 yards (18 m) along a marked line on the
footbal l field to establ ish corr ect technique
Backpedal ing for 20 yards (18 m), changing the pace of the
drill via an audio command (e.g., “slow” or “fast”), to develop
1447
the athlete’s ability to adapt backpedal ing speed in line with
tracking an opponent
Backpedal ing and then either on command or when reaching a
checkmark changing direction (either forward, backw ard, or
lateral to ei ther side)
Backpedal ing while tracking an opponent who is initially
running forward and then changing direction to sprint once the
opponent ini tiates a COD or sprint
A similar progression could be used for other transitional
movements such as side-shuf fling in court-based sports such as
basketball and tennis.
Figure 20.12  Technique checklist for common
transitional movements: backpedal and side-
shuffle.
1448
Backpedal
Starting Stance
Stand in a spl it stance, ensuring stabi lity.
Lower the center of mass b y sinking the hips.
Flex the f ront hip and knee to appr oximately 45 degr ees.
Flex the back knee to approximately 90 degrees and the hips to around 60
degrees.
The front foot should be flat (firm base of support), while the rear foot heel
should be r aised. Distribute weight tow ard the bal ls of both f eet.
Keep the back flat.
Lean the torso , with the shoulders o ver the f ront knee.
The head is up looking f orward (or tow ard the opponent; visual scanning).
Relax the arms and hang them str aight ahead of the hips.
First Step
1449
To initiate movement, drive off the back leg by extending the back leg knee
and hip with the center of mass (COM)  moving behind center of pressure at
toe-of f.
Using a low heel recovery, the front leg moves back behind the rear leg and
makes subsequent gr ound contact underneath the hips.
Each f oot contact should be toe to heel (nev er heel first).
Keep hips low to incr ease stabi lity.
Maintain a f orward trunk lean.
Keep the head up and looking f orward (or tow ard an opponent).
Involve a relaxed contralater al arm movement to match the timing and
amplitude of the leg movement. The range of motion at the shoulder should
be smal l.
The hips, knees, and ankles should be aligned in the frontal plane; avoid
planting the foot wider than the hips to help maintain torso and pelvic
position (i.e. , hip step- width) and a void a narr ow step width.
Subsequent Steps
With each step, use a low heel recovery to keep the feet close to the ground
(i.e., rapid limb switching with minimal knee separ ation on ground contact)
to enable  a quicker transition to a subsequent movement (e.g., COD or
forward sprint).
Keep the hips low to maintain a low COM again to help quicken the
transition into the subsequent movement (i.e., minimiz e vertical oscillation).
Possible cues include “sta y low” or “dr op the hips. ”
Each f oot contact should be toe to heel. A possible cue is “toe to heel. ”
Ensur e foot contact  is in line with the hips in the frontal plane to avoid feet
crossing and the risk of trips or f alls.
Maintain a f orward trunk lean.
Keep the head up and looking forward (or toward an opponent). A possible
cue is “ey es up” or “head up .”
Use a relaxed, low-amplitude contralater al arm movement with the objectiv e
to project COM r earward, with minimal v ertical pr ojection and osci llation.
Side-Shuffle
Start Position
Get in an athletic ready position: the feet are shoulder -width apart; weight is
distributed toward the balls of the feet; flex the hips, knees, and ankles (i.e.,
strong quarter-squat position); keep the back flat with a torso lean
(shoulders over knees); the head is up and the arms are by the sides with
elbows flex ed and hands in f ront of the body .
1450
Foot Position
Foot contact is on the bal ls of the f eet.
Feet are placed perpendicular to movement (parallel or slight hip external
rotation).
Feet sta y close to the gr ound.
Foot placement is wider than the knees; increased width increases stability
and lowers COM.
The feet should not cross. (In a diagonal or faster shuffle, the feet may
cross using a crossover step to help with the directional change or provide
extra propulsion to incr ease v elocity [21]. )
Leg Action
Take short steps, driving more from the leg farthest (i.e., pushing the medial
aspect of foot) from the intended direction of travel (i.e., COM moves
medial ly relative to center of pressure at toe-of f), with the other leg acting
as a pivot, allowing  the COM to travel medial ly and assist the shuffle step
(COM is now o ver center of pr essure).
Leg action is close to the gr ound in pr eparation f or ground contact.
COM Travel
COM is projected medially or laterally, with minimal vertical projection and
oscillation.
The legs r emain in a loaded athletic posi tion and the trunk r emains v ertical.
1451
Posture
An athletic posi tion is maintained thr oughout.
Maintain flexion of the ankles, knees, and hips, lowering the COM.
The back r emains flat.
The head is in l ine wi th the body .
1452
Arm Action
Perform a short, r apid arm action in the sagi ttal plane.
Training Goals
The three goals to enhance agility performance through training are
to develop the physical qualities to allow athletes to adopt the
required postur es and positions for a range of different agility
movements performed in the sport as well as enhance braking and
propulsion of such tasks (action capaci ty); to develop movement
efficiency and competency of range of agility movements pertinent
to the athlete’ s sport, and to enhance perceptual -cogni tive ability in
various si tuations and tactical scenarios (35).
1453
Methods of Developing Agility
As discussed throughout the chapter , a multifactorial approach is
warranted to develop both the physical and the perceptual-cogni tive
aspects required for continual improvement in agility performance.
Therefore, one should consider a plan that addresses underpinning
physical capaci ties using various strength development strategies,
technical comp etence in a closed-ski ll environment with movement -
specific action s (COD ability), and improvement of perceptual-
cogni tive capaci ty through agility drills and inherent aspects of skills
practice (58).
Strength
Similar to aspects of strength development for speed, strength
development for agility should emphasiz e relative strength and a
variety of speed–str ength qualities along the force–velocity
spectrum. Howev er, additional development of the eccentric strength
of the athlete due to the large braking forces during deceler ation
and COD actions within expressions of agility should be consider ed.
This means that training exercises can include a spectrum of load–
velocity profiles in the weight  room (42) as well as a variety of load–
velocity profile activities in the field, such as squat jumps,
countermo vement jumps, and drop jumps of various heights in
combination with the COD and agility drills themselv es. The
multifactorial nature of agility warrants a well-rounded approach to
strength development that spans the load– and force–velocity curve.
Table 20.4 provides an example of how training in the weight room
and on the field can satisfy the strength requirements underlying
agility performance. Understanding that athletes will develop the
physical requirements before being able to transfer newly gained
strength into technical competence helps coaches, strength and
condi tioning professionals, and athletes realize that performance
gains will lag behind fundamental physical requirements for a given
technical ski ll (99).
1454
TABLE 20.4  Comparison of Focus for Agility
Development in Novice and Advanced Athletes
Strength
requirementNovice
athletes
(weight room
associated)Novice
athletes
(field and
court drills)Advanced
athletes
(weight room
associated)Advanced
athletes
(field and
court drills)
Dynamic
strength:  required
to provide base
strength f or all
subsequent tr aining
as wel l as to ensur e
adequate mobi lity
during body weight
and loaded tr ainingBody weight
exercisesBody
awareness
work such as
leaning dri llsSquat (and
variations)
Pulls (and
variations)
Split-leg and
unilateral
variationsVarious COD
drills
Concentric
explosive
strength  (may
include isometric
strength work):
required to
effectively
reaccelerate (i.e. ,
propulsion) after
the br aking phase
or maintain str ong
position thr ough
the tr ansition phase
of COD and agi lityBilateral and
unilateral box
jumpsAcceleration
drills
Banded
drills and
isometric
postur al
holdsBox jumps
Weightl ifting-
based
exercises
Squat jumps
(loaded)
Lower -limb
ballistic
exercises
initiated f rom
static
positionsAdvanced
acceleration
drills (e.g. ,
sled push)
Eccentric
strength:  required
to dev elop the
ability to ef fectively
attenuate f orce,
absorb ener gy, and
support lar ge
external lower -limb
flexion moments
required during theSubmaximal
bilateral and
unilateral
landing
stabilization
exercises
(i.e., drop
landing,
single-legSubmaximal
deceler ation
drills (forward
emphasis and
teaching
various
deceler ation
positions)Advanced
bilateral and
unilateral
landing
stabilization
exercises
performed in
various planes
Drop landings
and receivingMaximal
deceler ation
drills (high
velocity and
various angles)
Note: COD = change of dir ection.
Adapted by permission from S. Nimphius, “Increasing Agility,” in High-P erformance Training
for Sports , edited by D. Joyce and D . Lewindon (Human Kinetics, 2014), 194 .
1455
Strength
requirementNovice
athletes
(weight room
associated)Novice
athletes
(field and
court drills)Advanced
athletes
(weight room
associated)Advanced
athletes
(field and
court drills)
braking phase of
COD and agi lityhop, and
hold)
Flywheel
resistance
training,
lower -
submaximal
eccentrics,
and tempo
trainingstrength
required
during the
catch phase of
weightl ifting-
based
exercises
Accentuated
eccentric
training
Maximal and
supramaximal
eccentrics and
resisted
eccentrics
Reactive
strength:  required
to incr ease the
ability to tr ansfer
from high ec centric
load to concentric
explosiv enessDrop landing
and landing
stabilization
exercisesBeginner
plyometrics
(slow to f ast
SSC activi ties,
bilateral to
unilateral,
sagittal to
multiplanar)Loaded jumps
Drop jumps
Complex or
contrast
trainingAdvanced
plyometrics
(fast SSC
activities,
unilateral, and
multiplanar
plyometrics)
Multidirectional
strength:  required
to hold body
position str ongly
during mul titude of
movement
demandsLunges,
landmine
skater squatsLow-velocity
COD (e.g. ,
Z-drill)
Lateral,
backw ard,
and forward
COD dri llsUnilateral
exercises
Greater
degree of
freedom
exercises
(e.g.,
landmine
exercises)High-
velocity
COD dri lls
Challenging
cutting-
angle COD
drills
Perceptual-
cognitive
abilities:  required— Simple r eaction
drills:
introduction to— Small-sided
games
Note: COD = change of dir ection.
Adapted by permission from S. Nimphius, “Increasing Agility,” in High-P erformance Training
for Sports , edited by D. Joyce and D . Lewindon (Human Kinetics, 2014), 194 .
1456
Strength
requirementNovice
athletes
(weight room
associated)Novice
athletes
(field and
court drills)Advanced
athletes
(weight room
associated)Advanced
athletes
(field and
court drills)
to progress in
visual scanning,
effective
anticipation, and
decision makingincreasing
either tempor al
or spatial
uncertaint yAgility drills
with
severely
restricted
tempor al
and spatial
aspects
Virtual
reality and
video-based
training
Note: COD = change of dir ection.
Adapted by permission from S. Nimphius, “Increasing Agility,” in High-P erformance Training
for Sports , edited by D. Joyce and D . Lewindon (Human Kinetics, 2014), 194 .
Change-of-Direction Ability
Similar to the progressions of plyometric activities based on intensi ty
and difficulty of each drill, closed-ski ll COD drills can progress from
beginner to intermediate to advanced levels based on the physical
loading demands that have been discussed in this chapter
(regulation of angle and intensi ty, which affect mechanical loading)
(36). Table 20.5 presents an example of a progression of drills for
COD ability (both rapid COD and those associated with
maneuv erability), as well as a progression plan for agility drills. The
physical loading during agility drills will be higher than beginner COD
drills. Therefore, table 20.5 provides practitioners with a series of
drills and a guidel ine for safely and effectively advancing athletes so
they can build on their physical and technical attributes as they
improve.
TABLE 20.5  Change-of-Direction and Agility Drill
Progressions
1457
Agility
component Beginner Intermediate Advanced
COD Deceler ation
drills (forward)
progressing to
higher entry
velocity or
shorter distance
to stop
Basic mo vement
patterns f or
forward,
backw ard, and
lateral shuf fling
COD dri lls that
involve low
velocities (less
than 5 y d [5 m]
of acceleration
into COD)— Z-
drill, for
exampleDeceler ation dri lls
(lateral) wi th same
progressions as f orward
Expand to include a
broad range of cut ting
angles less than 75
degrees
May incr ease entry
velocity during dri lls (up
to 10 y d [9 m] of
acceleration leading into
COD)Deceler ation to
reacceleration in
both f orward and
lateral directions
Expand f urther to a
compr ehensiv e
range of cut ting
angles, including
those gr eater than
75 degr ees
Maximal-ef fort
deceler ations and
entry v elocities
Maneuv erabilityBasic dri lls or tests
such as the Il linois
agility that r equire
nearly str aight-line
running wi th slight
bendsDrills that incr ease the
difficulty of the bend
involved such as the L -
run
Drills that r equire
transition between
modes of mo vement
(shuffling, sprinting, and
backpedal ing) such as
the T-testRepeated
maneuv erability
activities wi th
manipulated work -to-
rest ratios
Agility Physical and
technical
competence should
occur bef ore agility
drills are
incorpor atedCOD dri lls in beginner
and intermediate
categories wi th the
addition of simple stimul i
(arrow, pointing in a
certain dir ection)Expand into lar ge
degrees of spatial
and tempor al
uncertaint y (and
therefore greater
perceptual-
cogni tive stress)
Note: COD = change of dir ection.
Adapted by permission from S. Nimphiu s, “Increasing Agility,” in High-P erformance Training
for Sports , edited by D. Joyce and D . Lewindon (Human Kinetics, 2014), 194 .
1458
Agility
component Beginner Intermediate Advanced
These dri lls present a
limited number of
options f or the athlete to
have to r eact to (e.g. ,
right or left, f orward or
back) on the signal and
do not dev elop agi lity
per se; howev er, they
further incr ease intensi ty
of drills along the agi lity
development continuum.Small-sided games
Evasion games and
drills
Note: COD = change of dir ection.
Adapted by permission from S. Nimphiu s, “Increasing Agility,” in High-P erformance Training
for Sports , edited by D. Joyce and D . Lewindon (Human Kinetics, 2014), 194 .
Perceptual-Cognitive Ability
During years of skills training  (within the sport), athletes continual ly
enhance visual scanning, pattern recogni tion, and knowledge of the
situation, while in drills used to improve agility (outside of skills
practice) they primari ly focus on improving anticipation , decision-
making time, and accuracy. In the same way one would regularly
increase the demands of a physical task to continual ly improve
performance, one can train perceptual-cogni tive ability. Therefore,
agility activities should begin by adding a perceptual-cognitive
component (i.e., progressing from low to high cogni tive loading) to
common closed-ski ll COD drills. For example, deceler ations or the Z-
drill can evolve into agility drills by including a generic stimulus such
as a whistle, a voice command, or a flashing arrow or light (87, 110).
Following success with the aforementioned agility drills, progression
requires activities that have sport-speci fic stimul i such as evasive
drills and small-sided games , which have been said to have better
transfer to performance (87, 110). Both generic and specific stimul i
can be made more difficult within a given agility drill through
progressive increases in either tempor al (time) or spatia l (space or
1459
area) stress on the athlete.  See table 20.6 for a range of agility
factors that can be manipulated in agi lity drill design.
TABLE 20.6  Mechanical and Perceptual-Cognitive
Factors That Can Be Manipulated During Agility Drills
Variable Factor Interpretation
Mechanical Spacing and
pitch or court
dimensionsAltering the space and pi tch or court dimensions wi ll vary
the distances tr aveled and subsequent entry and exi t
velocities and momentum achiev ed, and ther efore allow
athletes to dev elop agi lity from lower v elocity, intensiv e
scenarios, to higher v elocity, extensiv e scenarios.
Additional ly, entry v elocity regulates intensi ty and
subsequent mechanical loading experienced.Entry and exi t
velocity
momentum
Agility actions
and angle of
CODPractitioners can put r estrictions on the t ype of COD
action perf ormed or al low athletes to try a r ange of
different COD actions to dev elop between-ski ll variabi lity
and mo vement solutions. Addi tional ly, varying the
location of end or tar get zones can al low athletes to
develop shal low, moder ate, and sharp COD abi lity to
enable them to be pr oficient in changing dir ection acr oss
a spectrum of angles.
Starting posi tion
(static or
transitional
movements)Athletes can begin the dri ll from di fferent static ini tiation
(e.g., drop step , jab step) and f rom di fferent tr ansitional
movements (i.e. , backpedal, cr ossover running, later al
shuffle) to cr eate dri ll variabi lity and to incr ease game
representativ eness and abi lity to ev ade or def end from
different locomotor actions.
Perceptual-
cogni tiveLocation and
number of
attackers or
defendersThe location of the def enders and at tackers can be
manipulated. F or example, in addi tion to f ront-on
situations, def enders can be located to the side or behind
the at tackers. This is pertinent f or 360-degr ee sports in
which def enders and at tackers can be located in v arious
locations on the pi tch or court. The addi tion of mul tiple
attackers and def enders can incr ease game
representativ eness, al lowing the opportuni ty for deco y
runs; at tacking and def ensive transitions and set pla ys;
team communication; and incr eased chaos, task
complexi ty, cogni tive loading, and v ariabi lity.
Note:  COD = change of
direction.
1460
Variable Factor Interpretation
Tempor al
constr aintsTempor al or time constr aints can be administer ed (i.e. ,
athlete has 5 s to achiev e the objectiv e) to maintain
quality and intensi ty (and often to r eplicate the r educed
tempor al constr aints associated in r andom sports). W ork-
to-rest ratios can be manipulated f or ener gy system
development and to r epresent peak demands of sports.
Rules and
condi tionsPractitioners can be cr eative and v ary the rules (i.e. , one-
hand or two-hand tags) and put constr aints on the
attackers or def enders to cr eate v ariation (i.e. , only two
evasive actions can be perf ormed bef ore commi tting to a
specific dir ection wi thin the dri ll).
Environment and
surfacesTo incr ease game r epresentativ eness, dri lls should be
performed on the sport -speci fic surf ace. Howev er, certain
sports ma y play on di fferent surf aces (i.e. , grass and
artificial turf ) with different har dness and f rictional
properties, and thus these should be consider ed.
Generic to sport -
specific stimulus
(developing
representativ e
learning
environments)Generic stimul i and sour ces of inf ormation can be used
such as audi tory commands, generic visual commands,
and stimul i such as flashing l ights, arr ows, and coach- or
player-dictated dir ectional commands to incr ease
cogni tive loading and incr ease mechanical loading in a
controlled en vironment. T ypical ly, the timing of stimul i
can be contr olled as wel l using speci fic equipment.
Howev er, to incr ease game r epresentativ eness, dev elop
perceptual-cogni tive speed, knowledge of si tuations,
memory r ecall, and anticipation, sport -speci fic stimul i
(i.e., multiple at tackers or def enders, inclusion of sport -
specific implements and scenarios) can be included to
develop mo vement solutions and tr ansfer to sporting
performance. These dri lls can be dev eloped
collaboratively wi th the ski lls coach f or simul taneous
technical and tactical dev elopment.
Task complexi ty
and cogni tive
loadingTo chal lenge mor e adv anced athletes and to ensur e
athletes ar e prepared for the chaotic demands of sport
when r eturning to sports, dri lls can begin wi th relatively
simple closed and open dri lls with one or two stimul i and
sources of inf ormation, bef ore progressing to mor e
chaotic open dri lls of incr eased game r epresentativ eness
with various sour ces of stimul i and inf ormation (i.e. ,
Note:  COD = change of
direction.
1461
Variable Factor Interpretation
multiple at tackers or def enders, inclusion of sport -speci fic
implements and stimul i can be included).
Note:  COD = change of
direction.
1462
Program Design
Program design  involves planning at several levels, each with its own
set of consider ations: microcycles (short term), mesocy cles (medium
term), and macrocycles (long term). The process is referred to as
periodization . Periodization  is the strategic manipulation of an
athlete’ s preparedness through the emplo yment of sequenced
training phase s defined by cycles and stages of workload (see
chapter 22). These planned workloads are varied to facilitate the
integr ation of planned programming tactics that will harmoniz e the
relationship between training-induced fatigue and accommodation
(30). Furthermor e, the periodization process is guided by
information collected during the athlete monitoring process.
Specifically, as an athlete progresses through a training phase,
consistent information acquir ed through various monitoring
strategies helps to show how the athlete is responding to the
training stimulus in the short term and how the athlete  should be
further developed in the long term—that is, how the original training
program should be modi fied to r eflect r esponses to the tr aining.
At each level of training plan development, strength and
condi tioning professionals must manipulate certain variables. While
these are useful in characterizing the training agenda as well as
quanti fying workloads, strength and condi tioning professionals
should keep in mind that each variable must be consider ed
individual ly, and they should regard how it affects the collective
system. Moreover, individual athlete training responses, which
athlete monitoring reveals, should be used in the manipulation of
these v ariables:
Angle —The intended angle for COM deflection during the task
and a r egulator f or knee joint loading
Approach velocity—The horizontal entry velocity of the COM as
the athlete begins to initiate their COD action over multiple
steps and a r egulator f or knee joint loading
1463
Exercise (or work) interv al—The duration or distance over
which a r epetition is ex ecuted
Exercise order—The sequenc e in which a set of repetitions is
executed
Frequency —The number of training sessions performed in a
given time period (e.g. , day or week)
Intensi ty—The effort with which a repetition is executed (% of
maximum)
Recovery (rest) interv al—The time period between repetitions
and sets
Repetition—The execution of a specific workload assignment
or mo vement technique
Series—A group of sets and r ecovery interv als
Set—A group of r epetitions and r est interv als
Volume-load —The density of volume performed at prescribed
intensi ties—f or example, 3 sets of 5 repetitions at 100
kilograms r esults in a v olume-load of 1,500 ki lograms
Volume —The amount of work (e.g., 3 sets of 5 repetitions)
performed in a giv en training session or time period
Work-to-rest ratio—The relative density of exercise and relief
interv als in a set, expr essed as a r atio
Chapter 22 explains periodization of resistance training programs,
and the same concepts can be applied to sprint, COD, and agility
training.
1464
Speed Development Strategies
The planning process for speed development is similar to that used
by strength and condi tioning professionals in the weight room.
Specifically, planning tactics should be periodiz ed in a manner that
addresses the physical and psychological components of sprinting
through emphasis and de-emphasis on particular qualities in a
phasic manner . An athlete’ s capabi lity to sprint can be improved
through the incorpor ation of training periods that are designed to
fully maximize and saturate a fitness quality, which may bolster the
effects of f uture training agendas.
To enhance speed, a practitioner should consider the relationship
between human locomotion and force production. Throughout this
chapter the authors have pointed to a link between sprint success
and certain physiological phenomena. Elite sprinters produce large
amounts of force within a short amount of time. This high level of
force allows the sprinter to produce longer step lengths at a faster
rate. This displa y of movement on the track reflects enhanced
neuromuscular factors—namely , maximal strength, RFD, and
impulse. These variables are the product of well-designed training
protocols that aim to enhance qualities such as the hypertr ophy of
task-speci fic motor units, firing frequency , rate coding, and muscle–
tendon sti ffness.
An option for speed development is provided in table 20.7,
demonstr ating how sequenced phases of training may seamlessly
develop sprint  potential through the matur ation of accelerative
abilities before the execution of maximal- velocity efforts. This model,
which can be referred to as a short to long method  of sprint training,
is a conceptua l progression that attempts to merge the relationship
between larger rates of acceleration and greater sprint velocities
(discussed earlier in this chapter) (31). Specifically, an athlete taking
part in a short to long model will begin the training year with an
emphasis on improving propulsiv e force output through short sprints
that maintain the biomecha nics associated with the acceleration
1465
phase of a sprint. Later, the athlete bridges into longer sprint work
that aims to enhance top speed through upright running mechanics.
The concept behind this proposed model is that an athlet e may see
greater improvements in top speed if force production can occur at
the ideal rate and moment through an investment in acceleration
development and optimization (62). An alternativ e approach for
track sprinters (100-200 m) may involve sequencing training from
gener al to specific preparation starting with an aerobic foundation to
developing anaerobic capaci ty (short speed–endur ance), to speed–
endur ance (long speed–endu rance) culminating in speed  (inclusiv e
of acceleration and maximum velocity) before the main competi tion
(14, 46).
TABLE 20.7  Application of Speed Development
Strategies: Phasic Development for Short-Distance
Sprinting (e.g., 100 m sprinter; bobsled athlete)
Block and
emphasis Training tool and notesLoad prescription
(rest periods
between sets) for an
example microcycle
within each blocka
Block 1
Primary aim:
Acceleration
development1. Use incl ine sprinting to dev elop pr oper
acceleration mechanics, pr oviding an
opportuni ty to maximiz e propulsion f orces
in the ini tial stages of a sprint.
2. Emphasiz e low heel r ecovery; driving the
foot down and thr ough the gr ound;
aggressive and complete arm action;
neutral head posi tion in l ine wi th the
spine. R esisted ac celeration bounds could
be incorpor ated to emphasiz e lower l imb
extension and f orceful thigh r etraction
during late swing.Monday:
Incline sprints
1 × 3 × 15 m (1.5
min)
1 × 4 × 20 m (2 min)
Wednesday:
Resisted or sled
acceleration bounds (2
min)
1 × 4 × 15 m
1 × 2 × 20 m (2 min)
Friday:
Incline sprints
1 × 2 × 15 m (1.5
min)
1 × 3 × 20 m (2 min)
1466
Block and
emphasis Training tool and notesLoad prescription
(rest periods
between sets) for an
example microcycle
within each blocka
1 × 2 × 25 m (2.5
min)
Block 2
Primary aim:  Long
acceleration
development
Secondary aim:
Improve transition
to upright sprinting1. Introduce flat -ground sprinting f rom a
low starting posi tion or towing
mechanism.
2. Promote the corr ect biomechanics of
transition sprinting f rom ac celeration to
maximal v elocity through the inclusion of
acceleration holds.bMonday:
Incline sprints
1 × 3 × 30 m (3 min)
1 × 3 × 40 m (4 min)
Wednesday:
Push-up starts
1 × 4 × 15 m (2 min)
Sled tows
2 × 3 × 20 m (2 min
/4 min)
Friday:
Crouch starts
1 × 4 × 15 m (2 min)
Acceleration holds
1 × 3 × 40 m (4 min)
Block 3
Primary aim:
Introduction to max
speed tr aining
Secondary aim:
Maintain
accelerative ability
Tertiary aim:
Exposur e to speed–
endur ance;
introduction to
special endur ance1. Maintain ac celeration abi lities thr ough
inclusion of short sprints at the beginning
of most sessions.
2. Begin exposur e to maximum speed
training thr ough ex ercises that use
upright sprinting mechanics.
3. Prescribe speed–endur ance or special
endur ance sessions later in the week
when ef fects of summated f atigue ma y
dampen neur al driv e.Monday:
Block starts
1 × 2 × 20 m (2.5
min)
1 × 2 × 30 m (3.5
min)
Accelerations f rom
crouch stance
1 × 3 × 40 m (5 min)
Wednesday:
High-stance starts
1 × 3 × 20 m (2.5
min)
Fly-ins
1 × 4 × 20 m bui ld/20
m fly (4 min)
Friday:
Block starts
1 × 4 × 20 m (3 min)
1467
Block and
emphasis Training tool and notesLoad prescription
(rest periods
between sets) for an
example microcycle
within each blocka
Accelerations f rom
crouch stance
1 × 2 × 40 m (5 min)
Speed–endur ance f rom
two-point stance
1 × 2 × 60 m (5.5
min)
Block 4
Primary aim:
Enhance maximal
speed abi lity
Secondary aim:
Maintain
accelerative ability
Tertiary aim:
Continued
exposur e to speed–
endur ance and
special endur ance1. Continue exposur e to maximum speed
training thr ough longer fly -in zones or
race-model ing pr actices.
2. Maintain ac celeration abi lities thr ough
incorpor ation of short sprints at the
beginning of most sessions.
3. Prescribe speed–endur ance or special
endur ance sessions r elevant to the
athlete’ s primary ev ents.Monday:
Block starts
1 × 2 × 30 m (3.5
min)
Acceleration holds
1 × 2 × 40 m (5 min)
Fly-float-fly
1 × 4 × 20/20/20 (7
min)
Wednesday
(technical session):
Ankling 2 × 15 m (1
min)
A-skip 2 × 20 m (1
min)
Ankle dribble 1 × 20 m
(1 min)
Calf dribble 1 × 20 m
(1 min)
Knee dribble 1 × 20 m
(1 min)
Dribble bleed 1 × 30 m
Straight-leg bound 2 ×
20 m (2 min)
Wicketc 2 × 30 m (3
min)
Wicket with run-of f 2 ×
30 m + 15 m (4 min)
Dribble blend 2 × 2 ×
40 m (5 min)
1468
Block and
emphasis Training tool and notesLoad prescription
(rest periods
between sets) for an
example microcycle
within each blocka
Friday:
Block starts 1 × 3 × 25
m (3 min)
Speed–endur ance f rom
two-point stance 1 × 2
× 50 m (6 min)
1 × 2 × 70 m (6.5
min)
1 × 2 × 90 m (7 min)
aEach session should be preceded by a warm-up that incorpor ates a range of technical
drills to work on aspects of technique in relation to both acceleration and maximum-
velocity sprinting (see sprint drills 1 to 6 on pages 675-683  for exam ples). These drills
could also f orm dedicated technique sessions as depicted in block 4 of the table.
bAn acceleration hold is a sprint drill for which the strength and condi tioning professional
places a cone on the track near or slightly before the point at which an athlete’ s shin
typical ly rises to a vertical position, which is indicativ e of upright sprinting. The athlete is
then instructed to maintain the speed achiev ed up to the cone through the remainder of
the sprint. For instance, an athlete may be prescribed acceleration holds for 40 meters, but
the coach’s mark ending the acceleration zone is placed at the 20-meter mark on the track.
The athlete then maintains that speed from 20 meters to 40 meters. This drill is used to
begin to f ocus on impr oving tr ansitional mechanics.
cWickets are a constr ained sprinting task that involves a period of sprint running whereby
the athlete appears to step over objects (e.g., mini-hur dles) in an effort to encour age high
foot recovery and optimal f ront-side mechanics.
Biomechanical Differences in A cceleration
Between S print and Team-Sport Athletes
The ability to accelerate linearly and displace the COM rapidly is essential in track
sprinting and multidirectional team sports. Track sprinters are the fastest humans
on earth, and thus examining the biomechanics and techniques they adopt is
intuitive to better understand and optim ize sprinting performance in athletes. Clear
biomechanical and technical differences exist between sprint and team-sport
athletes (25, 107); howev er, it is impor tant to consider that environment, task, and
performer constr aints will all interact and influence the acceleration strategy and
mechanics emplo yed and the o verall execution of the sprinting ski ll.
1469
Wild and colleagues (107) examined the first three steps during initial
acceleration and observ ed that sprinters achiev ed greater step velocities and
greater normal ized average horizontal external power , and they displa yed greater
normal ized step length and flight length, greater normal ized touchdown distance
(i.e., foot impact under or behind COM), and greater toe-of f distance (i.e., effective
push-of f behind COM) compar ed to rugby forwards and backs. Conversely , rugby
backs displayed slightly shorter contact times and slightly greater step rates
compar ed to sprinters. From a kinetics perspectiv e for later acceleration at
matched velocities (step 8-12 for sprinters and 9-20 for soccer), while no
differences were observ ed in the initial 20% of the stance phase between sprinters
and soccer athletes, sprinters produced greater anterior –posterior force across
most of the propulsiv e phase and greater net forces over similar contact times,
thus resulting in greater relative net impulse (25). As such, the sprinters achiev ed
greater average horizontal external power , which allowed them to accelerate
beyond the v elocity plateau of the soc cer athletes.
It should be noted  that the spatiotem poral, kinematic, and kinetic differences
observ ed could be partial ly attributed to sprinters accelerating from a four-point
position using blocks and performed on a rubber surface while wearing spikes. This
results in different body segment orientations such as greater forward trunk lean
and horizontal shin angles, which contribute to more horizontally orientated force
(107). Conversely , team-sport athletes  initiate their sprints from a more upright,
two-point stagger ed-stance position (resulting in a more vertical ly orientated
force), on a different surface with less favorable frictional properties for achieving
peak speed (i.e., grass, field turf, indoor courts), and with different footwear that is
designed for multidirectional and sport-speci fic movements (e.g., cleats or
trainers). Additional ly, sprinters’ preparation strategies are designed around the
sole task of maxim izing linear speed, which is the aim of that sport, and an
isolated event. As such, sprinting is a skill, and thus, sprinters can dedicate more
time and deliberate practice to developing the skill of sprinting, while their
periodiz ed strength  and condi tioning programs can also be tailored to maximiz e
the physical qualities that underpin linear sprinting. Conversely , team-sport
athletes must be proficient at a range of multidirectional movements (i.e.,
changing direction,  curved sprints of varying radii and direction, compar ed to
sprinters who perform curved sprints anticlockwise with radii ≥40 yd [36.5 m], and
deceler ation) and sport-speci fic skills (e.g., passing, tackling, shooting).
Additional ly, team-s port athletes must perform technical and tactical training and
gener ally must do so repeatedly over the course of long matches (generally
ranging 40-90 mins) and competi tive seasons. Due to these competing demands,
team-sport athletes  must spend a significantly lower proportion of time developing
sprinting skills, while their preparation programs also differ due to the different
physical, biomechanical, and car diorespiratory fi tness demands between sports.
1470
Monitoring Sprint Ability
The longstandi ng method of assessing an athlete’ s speed ability has
typical ly involved a test of maximal-ef fort linear sprinting . Much of
the time, the maximal-ef fort sprint test is carried out over a
distance, such as 40 yards (37 m), that is believed to be relevant to
the athlete’ s sport. While time to completion is an effective tool to
evaluate chang es in sprint performance, these tests do not fully
address the minute changes regarding an athlete’ s progression
toward race or field readines s. In addition, testing error in the form
of hand timing and various start tactics confound the interpretation
of testing r esults. As a r esult, strength and condi tioning pr ofessionals
may consider the adoption of additional monitoring tools as part of
their bat tery of assessments.
One such method of evaluation comes from the assistance of
high-speed camer as or optical timing systems that use interruptions
of infrared light to captur e data from an athlete’ s collective foot
strike (15). This technology provides strength and conditioning
professionals with additional insight into the sprint capabi lities of the
athlete, such as technique and movement strategies (16).
Additional ly, technology that permi ts the quanti fication of
instantaneous speed is also advantageous for insights into speed at
specific distances, time to achiev e specific speeds, peak speed,
acceleration, and τ (acceleration time constant). Table 20.8 provides
a description of key variables that may be beneficial in the
monitoring of speed dev elopment.
TABLE 20.8  Monitoring Speed Development
Measure Description Interpretation
Ground
contact timeThe total time al lotted for a
single stance phase.In gener al, decr eased gr ound contact
times coupled wi th impr oved sprint
completion times ma y suggest that an
athlete has impr oved the abi lity to
gener ate high r ates of f orce in a shorter
Note:  ETG = electronic timing gate; 2D = two-dimensional; 3D = three-dimensional ; LiDAR
= light detection and r anging.
1471
Measure Description Interpretation
amount of time. Howev er, an athlete ma y
demonstr ate sl ightly longer gr ound
contact times at the ini tial stages of the
sprint due to ac celeration mechanics.
Step length The distance between the toe
and heel of two consecutiv e
footsteps. Example: centimeters
between the heel of the right
foot and the heel of the left
foot.Improvements in step length (incr eases
in distance co vered) ma y occur thr ough
improved sprint mechanics or postur e
and ul timately enhanced f orce output.
Stride
lengthThe distance between the heel
in two consecutiv e steps of the
same f oot. Example: meters
between the heel of the right
foot and the heel of the next
ground contact made b y the
right f oot.Improvements in stride length (incr eases
in distance co vered by two suc cessiv e
steps) ma y occur thr ough impr oved sprint
mechanics or postur e, and ul timately
enhanced f orce output.
Flight time The dur ation of time that an
athlete is not in contact wi th the
ground. This oc curs between
the end of one step and the
beginning of the subsequent
step.Increases in fl ight time can be interpr eted
in two w ays:
An athlete is pr oducing higher v ertical
forces over a shorter amount of time,
resulting in optimal horiz ontal
displacement of the athlete’ s mass
down the tr ack.
An athlete is pr oducing higher f orces
over a longer amount of time, which
may result in unnecessary v ertical
amplitude of the center of mass.
Stride angle The angle at which the f oot
leaves the tr ack.The angle of stride ma y provide the
strength and condi tioning pr ofessional
with the abi lity to determine i f the athlete
is producing f orces at the right moment,
which is achiev ed thr ough pr oper sprint
mechanics. Furthermor e, data on the
stride angle elucidate what stage of sprint
the athlete is at taining (ac celeratory,
transitory, maximum speed) and ma y
relate to gr ound contact times.
Note:  ETG = electronic timing gate; 2D = two-dimensional; 3D = three-dimensional ; LiDAR
= light detection and r anging.
1472
Measure Description Interpretation
Speed The relationship between steps
and the sum of the first step’ s
ground contact time and the
flight time leading to the
subsequent gr ound contact.
Alternativ ely, instantaneous
speed or v elocity can be
examined using GPS technology ,
LiDAR, laser , radar, motoriz ed
resistance devices, and 2D and
3D motion captur e.Speed dictates how f ast an athlete can
move the body mass o ver a speci fic
distance.
Instantaneous speed/v elocity at time
points/distances can be calculated,
facilitating a gr eater insight into sprint
strategy
Acceleration The change in speed as
determined b y the del ta of two
steps (e.g. , right heel to left
heel) and the sum of gr ound
contact times and fl ight times of
each step .Acceleration pr ovides insight into how
well the athlete changes speed
(increasing v elocity in a dir ection) o ver a
prescribed distance. F or most athletes,
furthering the length an athlete can
accelerate wi ll lead to higher top speed,
provided that postur al integri ty and
mechanics ar e sound.
Technique Acceleration and maximum
velocity techniques can be
objectiv ely quanti fied (i.e. , joint
angles) or qual itatively
examined and compar ed to
technical models to help
improve perf ormance and
mitigate injury risk.Qualitative analysis is r elatively simple to
perform and only r equires filming of
sprint technique. High-speed video
recording is a common f eature of most
smartphones and tablets, and athletes’
technique can be compar ed to technical
models such as Al tis Kinogr am or Sprint -
Mechanics assessment scor e (16) to help
individual ize training.
Note:  ETG = electronic timing gate; 2D = two-dimensional; 3D = three-dimensional ; LiDAR
= light detection and r anging.
1473
Agility Development Strategies
The development of agility is best achiev ed using a periodiz ed
programming method. Random programming or the development of
agility using only sport-speci fic methods such as small-sided games
has not been found to be as effective (13). Although agility is a
constant element on the field of play or during skills practices, it is
recommended that agility development begin with the use of COD
drills (preplann ed) and progress in difficulty through increases in the
physical deman ds; this is followed by the addition of drills involving
perceptual-cogni tive stress or what are typical ly termed agility drills
(60, 110). In line with this recommendation, the development of
agility should start with a needs analysis based on assessment of the
athlete’ s COD ability and agility. The agility test should specifically
evaluate perceptual-cogni tive ability, as previously described in table
20.3 on page 655. Further , depending on the additional movement
requirements of the sport, one may also choose to use a test that is
more dependent on maneuv erability.
The following is an example of steps for determining the
appropriate tests, analyzing the results, and using them to program
agility development of an athlete. Because agility performance is
underpinned by multiple factors, one should target the largest
window of opportuni ty through direct assessment of the strengths
and weaknesses of the athlete.
Step 1. Perform a needs analysis of the sport and match tests
appropriately to assess these qual ities (table 20.9 ).
Step 2. Determine strengths and weaknesses by comparing results
as a standar dized score to performance standar ds or team mean
(figure 20.13 ).
Step 3. Plan the development of a primary area of need and a
secondary ar ea of need f or the athlete.
Step 4. Distribute the time available for this development based on
need identi fication.
1474
Step 5. Provide a preliminary plan for transition of percent
distribution through the training blocks (table 20.10 ). Determine if
this progression is appropriate by monitoring the development of
COD and agi lity as described in table 20.8  (e.g., COD defici t).
TABLE 20.9  Needs Analysis for Agility Development
Sport Basketball
Timeframe 12 weeks (8 weeks of f-season and 4 weeks pr eseason
training)
Sport-specific agility
needs analysisHigh- velocity COD
Backdoor cuts, cuts thr ough the lane, f ast br eak, and
possession changes
Maneuv erability (mul tiple modes of COD mo vement)
Defensive shuf fling, backpedal ing, and bending changes
of direction ar ound scr eens to lose def ender
Agility (per ceptual-cogni tive)
Decision-making time (pr ovides gr eat adv antages both
offensively and def ensively)
Ability to mo ve in reaction to pla y or opponent
Recommended tests 5-0-5 including COD , T-test, agi lity test (decision time
measur ed)
Note:  COD = change of dir ection.
1475
FIGURE 20.13  Strengths and weaknesses of an athlete through representation of
standar dized scores for perceptual-cogni tive ability, maneuv erability, and COD ability.
Negativ e values indicate performance lower than average, whereas positive values indicate
performance bet ter than a verage.
With the information provided by the testing as well as
considering other physical fitness capaci ties, one can implement an
appropriate periodiz ed plan. Table 20.11 shows an example of three
blocks of training (four weeks each). The length of time for a
training session  is between 10 and 15 minutes inclusiv e of work and
rest time and can be completed one to three times per week
depending on additional requirements of the athletes (e.g., skills
training increasing in the preseason). A variety of drills can replace
the examples given here; howev er, they should be chosen based on
their classi fication and abi lity to addr ess the athlete’ s needs.
TABLE 20.10  Planned Distribution of Training Blocks
for Agility Development
COD ManeuverabilityAgility (perceptual-
cognitive)
PRIMARY AIM SECONDARY AIM TERTIARY AIM
Estimated %
time al lottedBlock 1 ~65%
Block 2 ~60%Block 1 ~35%
Block 2 ~30%Block 1 N/A
Block 2 ~20%
1476
COD ManeuverabilityAgility (perceptual-
cognitive)
through
blocksBlock 3 ~50% Block 3 ~25% Block 3 ~25%
Additional
commentsCheck str ength or
specifically load
absorption abi lity
with drop
landings.Assess body
positioning during
lateral shuf fling and
COD.May be r eliant on per ceptual-
cogni tive ability. This ma y
have previously mask ed the
identi fication that the athlete
could impr ove his or her
physical COD abi lity.
TABLE 20.11  Application of Agility Development
Strategies
Block and emphasis Training tools and notes Load prescription for week 1
Block 1
Primary aim:  COD
(deceler ation capaci ty
—linear)
Secondary aim:
Maneuv erability (body
position)Braking tasks ar e eccentric
focused; ther efore, start
with low v olumes simi lar to
those used to intr oduce
eccentric tasks
(plyometrics).
Focus on the athlete
staying low; sacri fice speed
for posi tioning, and
emphasiz e optimal
deceler ation mechanics.2-3 sessions per week; r est period
between sets
COD Dri ll
Deceler ations* (5 y d [5 m]
start-stop) 1 × 6 (30 s)
(Alternate nonpr eferred,
preferred leg finish br aking
[split stance] posi tion and
bilateral athletic r eady
position.)
Maneuv erability Drill
Lateral shuf fling @ height or
backpedal ing 1 × 4 × 11 y d
[10 m] (30 s)
Block 2
Primary aim:  COD
(deceler ation capaci ty
—later al)
Secondary aim:
Maneuv erabilityEnsur e that the athlete can
use body posi tion to
effectively br ake when
oriented both f orward and
laterally; focus on the
athlete absorbing into stop .2-3 sessions per week; r est
periods between sets
COD Dri ll
Deceler ations* (11 y d [10 m]
start-stop) 1 × 6 (30 s) as wi th
week 1; use same v ariations
Note:  COD = change of dir ection.
*Speed should progressively increase for deceler ation drills through the weeks—f or
example, half speed to three-quarters  speed entry velocity or changing distance of start-
stop dri lls inclusiv e of generic and sport -speci fic stimul i.
Note:  There is not a separ ate emphasis on acceleration ability here; it is expected this will
be addr essed in conjunction wi th speed sessions.
1477
Block and emphasis Training tools and notes Load prescription for week 1
(transition between
modes of COD—
shuffle to sprint to
shuffle)Expand to a single ef fort in
reaction to generic
stimulus.
Promote ef fective
application of f orce into the
ground (“pushing the
ground a way”); w atch
shank angle and trunk
position for visual
feedback.Deceler ations (later al) 1 × 4
(30 s)
Maneuv erability Drill
Z-drill (forward) 2 × 4 (30 s; 2
min) (Alw ays alternate start
direction: left to right vs. right
to left dir ection)
Y-drill using di fferent cut ting
maneuv ers; side-step ,
crossover, or spl it-step to
develop mo vement solutions.
Ensur e exit out of dir ectional
change is completed into a
rapid deceler ation. 3 × 4 (1
min; 3 min) (Generic stimul i
could be added later wi thin the
block)
Block 3
Primary aim:  COD
(effective deceler ation
to reacceleration)
Secondary aim:
Maneuv erability
(combine ef fective
transition and body
positioning)
Tertiary aim:  Agility
(focus on k eeping
COD perf ormance and
body posi tion ev en in
response to a generic
stimulus)Focus on “br aking in” and
“exploding out ” of the
COD.
Focus on f ootwork and
keeping low , with steps
that pr omote a “dr op and
drive” out of the COD .
This is used to check the
transfer of ph ysical tr aining
to a mor e speci fic (yet still
generic) stimulus. F ocus on
the “decide and go ,”
checking f or athletes to
reorient ef fectively or to
move as ef fectively as they
decide.1-2 sessions per week (depending
on ski lls volume); r est period
between sets
COD Dri ll
Modified 5-0-5 dri ll 2 × 4 (30
s; 2 min) (Al ternate plant f oot)
Maneuv erability Drill
T-test 1 × 4 (30 s)
Agility
Reactiv e agility (Y agi lity drill) 1
× 4 (30 s) (Same dir ection in
response to pointing in a
direction)
Skills training wi ll also
inherently contain sport -
specific stimulus tr aining
Note:  COD = change of dir ection.
*Speed should progressively increase for deceler ation drills through the weeks—f or
example, half speed to three-quarters  speed entry velocity or changing distance of start-
stop dri lls inclusiv e of generic and sport -speci fic stimul i.
Note:  There is not a separ ate emphasis on acceleration ability here; it is expected this will
be addr essed in conjunction wi th speed sessions.
1478
Monitoring Agility and Change-of-
Direction Ability
In line with the concepts consider ed in monitoring sprint
performance, simply assessing performance modification in either
COD or agility according to time to completion of the chosen test
does not isolate the physical quality or perceptual-cogni tive quality
that one is trying to examine—the actual ability to change direction
(70, 71, 73, 92, 96). Therefore, when monitoring COD or agility
performance, the strength and condi tioning professional may
consider the measur es in table 20.12 . Although these  aspects of
performance have been measur ed using expensiv e devices such as
three-dimensional motion analysis equipment, readily available high-
speed cameras (collecting more than 100 frames per second) could
easily be used in conjunction with the usual timing methods (hand
or electr onic).
TABLE 20.12  Monitoring Agility Development
Measure Description Interpretation
Completion
timeTotal time to complete the task Represents the dur ation i t takes the
athlete to get f rom A to B but can be
biased tow ard athletes wi th superior
linear speed; pr ovides l imited
information r egarding COD abi lity,
technique, or str ategy . Can be simply
assessed using a stopw atch or ET Gs.
COD defici t The di fference in time between
a straight-line sprint and a
COD test of equal lengthAssessing the COD defici t provides
insight into the addi tional amount of
time r equired by the athlete due to the
demands of COD . An example is
subtraction of 10 m sprint time f rom 5-0-
5 COD time (a common COD test is 10 m
in length). Howev er, COD defici t can be
biased tow ard slower athletes and
Note:  COD = change of direction; COM = center of mass; ETG = electr onic timing gate;
2D = two-dimensional; 3D= thr ee-dimensional; LiDAR = l ight detection and r anging.
1479
Measure Description Interpretation
provides l imited inf ormation r egarding
COD abi lity, technique, or str ategy .
Ground
contact time
(GCT)The total time the f oot is in
contact wi th the gr ound during
the COD (length of the plant
phase, main ex ecution plant
foot contact)Shorter gr ound contact times ar e
gener ally associated wi th faster COD
performance and indicate the athlete is
spending less time perf orming the COD
(if the athlete deflects their COM at the
same angle). I nsight into GCT can
establ ish whether the athlete is
improving their COD abi lity irrespectiv e
of total time. GCT can be measur ed
using a bui lt-in force platf orm, contact
mat, or v erified using 2D analysis.
Exit velocity The horiz ontal v elocity of
the athlete during the ini tial
step out of the plant of the
COD
Consider ed the first step of
reacceleration f rom plant
foot to f oot strik eUnlike the si tuation f or total time, using
a high-speed video camer a or 3D motion
analysis to assess the v elocity of the
athlete (at the hip or COM) can giv e a
direct measur e of the abi lity to change
direction. I mproved exi t velocity with the
same or f aster gr ound contact times
implies gr eater RFD r elevant to
improving COD abi lity.
Entry v elocityVelocity of the athlete bef ore
the plant phase; can be
measur ed over sev eral steps or
as the last step entering the
plant phase of the CODEntry v elocity is a str ong determinant of
COD completion time, and the abi lity to
enter the COD wi th high v elocity can be
advantageous f or COD actions. I nsight
into entry v elocity can be used to
establ ish whether an y pacing or sel f-
regulatory str ategies ar e adopted.
Assessed using the abo ve methods f or
exit velocity.
Decision-
making timeMeasur ement of the time
between two ev ents is
consider ed decision-making
time and can ei ther be a
positive or a negativ e value.
Decision-making time can be
broken down into two di fferent
orientations toSimilar to the measur ement of entry and
exit velocity, a high-speed camer a can be
positioned to the side of the dir ectional
change to captur e both the stimulus and
the athlete’ s first defini tive foot plant to
change dir ection in r esponse. If the
decision-making time is negativ e, this
indicates that the athlete anticipated the
Note:  COD = change of direction; COM = center of mass; ETG = electr onic timing gate;
2D = two-dimensional; 3D= thr ee-dimensional; LiDAR = l ight detection and r anging.
1480
Measure Description Interpretation
compr ehensiv ely assess how
athletes r espond during game
scenarios: (a) def ensive (mo ve
in the same dir ection as the
stimulus); (b) of fensive (mo ve
in the opposi te direction to the
stimulus).directional change bef ore the stimulus
finalized the mo vement. Negativ e
decision-making time is observ ed only
during r esponse to mo vements of
another person (video or human
stimulus), highl ighting the importance of
stimulus speci ficity during agi lity
protocols. The measur ement of decision-
making time in both def ensive and
offensive situations al lows str ength and
condi tioning pr ofessionals to identi fy
whether athletes need to dev elop
perceptual-cogni tive ability in a speci fic
game scenario .
COD phase-
specific
informationKinetic or kinematic data
pertaining to the appr oach or
acceleration, deceler ation,
turn, and r eacceleration
phases of a COD taskThis enables the pr actitioner to examine
the overall COD b y splitting the task into
several phases (e.g. , appr oach, COD ,
and exi t). This inf ormation enables the
identi fication of COD str ategy and
establ ishes str engths and ar eas for
development. Essential ly, it provides
further inf ormation r egarding how the
athlete achiev ed that completion time.
Advanced technology such as LiDAR or
radar ma y provide inf ormation r egarding
time and distance br aking and speed at
braking onset.
Alternativ e
consider ationsPractitioners should also
consider the athlete’ s
momentum into the COD task
because gr eater momentums
require greater br aking
impulse to deceler ate.
Additional moni toring of pacing
strategies is also essential
because athletes ma y regulate
entry speed to r educe
momentum to mak e
deceler ation or br aking easier .
Finally, video analysis is also
Note:  COD = change of direction; COM = center of mass; ETG = electr onic timing gate;
2D = two-dimensional; 3D= thr ee-dimensional; LiDAR = l ight detection and r anging.
1481
Measure Description Interpretation
recommended to observ e
technique to understand
compensatory str ategies, ar eas
for dev elopment, and
comparison to technical
models.
Note:  COD = change of direction; COM = center of mass; ETG = electr onic timing gate;
2D = two-dimensional; 3D= thr ee-dimensional; LiDAR = l ight detection and r anging.
1482
Conclusion
Speed, change of direction, and agility are well-establ ished measur es
of athletic prowess in most sporting contexts. For this reason,
strength and condi tioning professionals should be aware of how
these abilities are establ ished and modified through training plan
design and execution. These components of athletic movement and
game play are underpinned by task-speci fic force application. This
task-speci fic force production must be large enough to stabilize the
athlete’ s body weight in the presence of gravity, displace the athlete
from one point to another , and continue moving the athlete at high
velocities.
Running speed is associated with the relationship between step
length and rate. Sprinting is a near-maximum to maximum run that
is defined by large rates of force developed within a short stance
time. Better sprinters spend more time in the air as a result of
increased step lengths that occur at faster rates than those of their
slower counterparts and are better able to produce larger net forces
that are oriented optimal ly for effective acceleration and top speed.
Agility encompasses the skills and abilities needed to explosiv ely
change movement direction, velocities, or modes in response to a
stimulus. Both sprinting and agility use the SSC and greater
neuromuscular efficiency compar ed to slower movements. Howev er,
agility includes perceptual-cogni tive demands such as visual search
scanning, decision making, anticipation, and reaction times that
make it a separ ate tr aining qual ity.
Strength and condi tioning professionals aiming to improve these
performance attributes should do so through the cyclic and
sequential arrangement of training phases that harmoniz e strength
training with speed, agility, or COD practice or some combination of
these. This training effect may best result from the incorpor ation of
exercises that are task specific and promote proper movement
mechanics. The training prescribed should reflect the results of a
needs analysis assessment at the beginning of a long phase or year.
1483
Furthermor e, subsequent training plans should be optimiz ed through
an ongoing athlete monitoring program, which can assist the
strength and condi tioning professional in determining how the
athlete is r esponding to the pr ogrammed agenda.
SPEED AND AGILITY DRILLS
SPEED DRILLS
  1  Ankling  675
  2  A-Skip  67 6
  3  B-Skip  678
  4  Switches   680
  5  Dribbles   681
  6  Straight-Leg B ound   682
  7  Sprint R esistance: I ncline for Acceleration   684
AGILITY DRILLS
  8  Deceler ation Dri ll  685
  9  Y Agility Drill  686
10  Multiplanar Ac celeration I nitiation B ox Drill  689
11  Evasion Dri ll  690
Speed Drills
  1  ANKLING
Ankling is a commonly prescribed sprint drill to develop the correct
foot contact str ategy during maximum- velocity sprinting.
Starting Position
Begin the exercise in a tall stance with the torso directly above
the hips, knees, and ankles (stack ed joints).
1484
Movement Phase
Initiate movement by pushing off one limb through the ankle,
achieving a small flight phase. For the subsequent foot ground
contact, the ankle should be in a neutral position and make
contact on the f orefoot under the hips or center of mass.
During ground contact there should be minimal knee and ankle
flexion. The athlete should be cued to “punch the ground” with
the limb, emphasizing short, stiff ground contacts with each
ground contact.
The trunk should remain upright with a slight lean and hips
extended (little to no flexion during ground contact). The
contralater al arm range of movement will be small, but the
speed of the arm movemen t should match the rate of foot
contacts.
Technique Tips
Ensur e an upright trunk and a void leaning back.
Make sure the athlete drives vertical ly with each foot contact,
emphasizing a stiff strategy landing on the forefoot with the
ankle in a neutr al posi tion.
Ensur e the arm movement is timed with the leg movement and
will be of a low ampl itude.
Avoid excessiv e hip flexion, resulting in excessiv e foot contact
ahead of the COM, with the aim for foot contact as close as
possible to under the COM.
1485
  2  A-SKIP
The A-skip is a commonly prescribed sprint drill to develop the
correct leg r ecovery mechanics f or maximum- velocity sprint running.
Starting Position
Begin the exercise in a tall stance with the torso directly above
the hips, knees, and ankles (stack ed joints).
Movement Phase
Initiate movement by lifting one leg to a flexed knee position in
which the top of the thigh is near parallel. The foot of the lifted
leg (swing leg) should be approximately at knee height of the
stance leg, with the heel pulled up under the buttocks and the
ankle dorsiflexed. This will result in the appear ance of a figure
four at the legs. The swing leg will always accord with this
description.
Begin the first skip by driving the swing leg down to the ground
through an active foot, establ ished through slight dorsiflexion.
Lift the big toe up to establ ish appr opriate dorsi flexion.
1486
Complete the drive down of the swing leg through the forefoot
until near –triple extension of the new stance leg oc curs.
The fore- to mid-foot of the new stance leg should land under
the hips, maintaining the appear ance of stack ed joints.
At the initiation of contact, the opposing leg should pop up
rapidly to cr eate a swing leg.
The force gener ated from the active push down should coincide
with a skipping motion that will result in a horizontal
displacement of the body down the tr ack.
Technique Tips
Maintain a tall postur e with relaxed shoulders through the entire
duration.
The arms should move at the same rate as the legs, with
minimal to no pausing of arm action between cy cles.
Regression and Progression
A regression of the drill includ es an A-march, which involves the
same movements but at a slower pace to establ ish the correct
leg recovery mechanics. If athletes struggle coordinating the
contralater al arm movement, the hands can be placed on the
hips ini tially.
To progress from the A-skip, a running form emphasiz es the leg
recovery action with the thighs reaching parallel with the
ground.
1487
  3  B-SKIP
The B-skip is a commonly prescribed sprint drill to develop the
correct leg recovery and subsequent touchdown mechanics for
maximum- velocity sprint running.
Starting Position
1488
Begin the exercise in a tall stance with the torso directly above
the hips, knees, and ankles (stack ed joints).
Movement Phase
Initiate movement by lifting one leg to a flexed knee position in
which the top of the thigh is near parallel (i.e., front-side
mechanics). The foot of the lifted leg (swing leg) should be
approximately at knee heigh t of the stance leg, with the heel
pulled up under the buttocks and the ankle dorsiflexed. This will
result in the appear ance of a figure four at the legs. The swing
leg wi ll always accord with this description.
Begin the first skip by aggressively driving the swing leg down
to the ground through an active foot, establ ished through slight
dorsiflexion. Lift the big toe up to establ ish appropriate
dorsiflexion. (The main difference between the A- and B-skip is
the more aggressive driving down of the swing leg to
emphasiz e correct touchdown  mechanics and increased angular
velocities.)
Complete the drive down of the swing leg through the forefoot
until near –triple extension of the new stance leg oc curs.
The fore- to mid-foot of the new stance leg should land under
the hips, maintaining the appear ance of stack ed joints.
At the initiation of contact, the opposing leg should pop up
rapidly to cr eate a swing leg.
The force gener ated from the active push down should coincide
with a skipping motion that will result in a horizontal
displacement of the body down the tr ack.
Technique Tips
Maintain a tall postur e with relaxed shoulders through the entire
duration.
The arms should move at the same rate as the legs, with
minimal to no pausing of arm action between cycles. If the
athlete strugg les initially to coordinate the contralater al arm
1489
action, the athlete could place the hands on hips to initially
master the corr ect leg r ecovery and touchdown action.
During the aggressive drive down of the swing leg, ensure the
leg sweeps back to contact the ground with the forefoot under
the hips.
Regression and Progression
A regression of the drill includes a B-march or -walk, which
involves the same movement s but at a slower pace to establish
the correct leg recovery and touchdown mechanics. A
progression from the B-skip involves a running form
emphasizing the leg recovery to touchdown action and
overhead variations to focus on trunk stability and lumbopelvic
control.
1490
  4  SWITCHES
Switches emphasiz e rapid limb switching and path of movement of
the feet that resemble the more linear path of movement associated
with accelerative sprinting.
Starting Position
1491
Stand on one leg with one leg flexed 90 degrees at the hip and
knee to ensur e the thigh is parallel with the ground. The ankle
is neutral or dorsiflexed, which emphasiz es front-side mechanics
and a positive shin angle. The contralater al arm is held with the
elbow flexed to <90 degrees and with the hand around the
height of the chin.
The foot of the standing leg is flat on the ground, and the
ipsilateral arm is r elaxed by the side of the body .
The trunk is upright wi th the head up and ey es looking f orward.
Movement Phase
While maintaining an upright trunk with the head up, the
athlete simultaneously drives the standing leg up and the flexed
leg down, emphasizing r apid swi tching of the l imbs.
The contralateral arm movement matches the speed of the leg
movement.
The landing of the previously flexed limb on the ground and the
standing limb to the flexed position should occur at the same
time. Pause in this position (initial position) before repeating for
a desir ed number of r epetitions.
Technique Tips
Ensur e an upright trunk and head with no leaning back or
excessiv e lumbar flexion.
Emphasiz e rapid leg and arm switching, avoiding excessively
high thigh and knee l ifts (>90 degr ees).
Progressions
Rather than perform with a pause between repetitions, this drill
can progress to performing repeatedly for a desired number of
repetitions on the spot (e.g. , 2 or 3) bef ore pausing.
A further progression would  be to add a mini-hop forward
between repetitions but still emphasizing the rapid limb,
switching to establ ish a more rhythmic pattern. Trunk stability
1492
and lumbopelvic control can be challenged with overhead
variations.
  5  DRIBBLES
This drill, which assists with many aspects of the technical running
model involving a scaled running practice, emphasiz es the more
circular path of the f oot during maximum- velocity sprinting.
Starting Position
Stand with the feet hip-width apart and the head and trunk
upright.
Movement Phase
Lift one leg so the foot is above the opposing ankle with toes
pointed up, then sweep the foot down and back to make foot
contact. As the center of mass moves ahead of the foot, the
foot should drive up and over the ankle. Repeat this circular
foot motion with each limb for the designated distance. The
1493
foot contact should be with the ankle in a neutral position and
may begin heel to toe wi th each f oot contact.
The drill will involve a low knee lift but will become larger with
progressions. The foot contact will also progress to forefoot
contact wi th these pr ogressions.
The trunk leans forward slightly with the head up and eyes
looking forward. The athlete adopts a contralater al arm
movement at a lower amplitude of maximal sprint running, but
the timing and range of motion should match the timing and
range of motion of the legs.
Technique Tips
Emphasiz e the cir cular r ecovery motion of the f oot.
Maintain a slight trunk lean with head up and eyes looking
forward.
Ensur e the contralater al arm movement matches the timing and
range of motion of the leg action.
Regressions and Progressions
If the athlete initially struggles with the ankle dribble, he or she
could lower the intensi ty to a walking pace and work on the
circular path of movement of the foot over the opposing ankle
using a heel–toe contact.
Progression from the ankle dribble involves greater range of
movement of the circular foot pattern, so the foot first reaches
calf height (cal f dribble) and then knee height (knee dribble).
Furthermor e, after mastering  these versions, progressions  could
involve dribble bleeds whereby the athlete may progress from
ankle to calf to knee dribble within the same repetition or blend
a knee dribble to a high-speed run.
1494
  6  STRAIGHT-LEG BOUND
This drill emphasiz es rapid retraction of the lower limb, offering
similarity to the desired touchdown leg mechanics of maximum-
velocity sprinting and increasing hip angular velocity and foot
touchdown v elocity.
Starting Position
Stand with the feet hip-width apart and the head and trunk
upright.
Movement Phase
After an initial upward and forward hop from one limb, while
maintaining a straight limb (extended knee and neutral ankle
position), drive the opposi te hip forward and then rapidly retract
the limb to make ground contact on the forefoot before
rebounding and r epeating wi th the opposi te limb.
Emphasiz e the rapid retraction of the limb in preparation for
ground contact, and ensur e that ground contact times remain
short and, ideal ly, under the hips.
The trunk should be maintained in an upright position (must
avoid leaning back), wi th the head up and ey es looking f orward.
1495
The athlete should adopt a contralater al limb movement that
matches the timing and r ange of motion of the l imbs.
Technique Tips
Maintain an upright trunk wi thout leaning back.
Emphasiz e rapid, forceful retraction of the limb toward ground
contact, and ensur e that ground contacts are short and under
the hips.
Adopt a contralater al arm movement that matches the timing
and range of motion of the lower l imbs.
Regressions and Progressions
If the athlete initially struggles with the straight-leg bound, the
athlete could lower the intensity by reducing the hip flexion
range of motion and speed  of retraction, and gradual ly and
progressively bui ld up the speed and r ange of motion.
Trunk stability and lumbopelvic control can be challenged with
overhead variations of straight-leg bounds, and straight-leg
bounds can be transitioned or blended into normal upright
running with the aim that previous straight-leg bounds will
transfer to increased hip angular velocities, limb retraction, and
active touchdowns with high velocities (i.e., 20-yard straight leg
build up into flying 20- yard sprint).
1496
  7  SPRINT RESISTANCE: INCLINE FOR
ACCELERATION
Incline sprintin g is a type of resisted sprinting that is prescribed to
promote physical and technic al improvements within the acceleration
phase of a sprint. Alternativ e approaches to using an incline include
using weighted sleds.
Starting Position
1497
Begin in the correct starting position (commonly called a
crouched start). First, split the stance position by placing the
dominant leg forward and dropping the back or swing leg by
one to two f oot lengths.
The length of split between the drive and swing leg is largely
determined by the compr omise between the (a) ability to
gener ate sufficient forces needed to overcome a lower center of
gravity and (b) comfort. In addition, the feet should be split in
such a manner  that the front and back legs are in line with the
pelvis, so that no unnecessary twisting of the hips oc curs.
Once the split stance has been establ ished, drop the back knee
straight down so that the shank (shin) is nearer (more parallel)
to the ground. This aids in promoting the proper driving position
needed to begin ac celeration.
With a tall and rigid torso, raise the arm that is opposi te to the
front or drive leg to a position near or slightly above the
forehead. The hand should be spaced approximately 6 to 8
inches (15-20 cm) away from the forehead. The rear arm
(opposi te to the rear or swing leg) should be pulled back to a
point at which the hand is near the lateral aspect of the
buttocks with an elbow angle  that may range from 100 degrees
to 120 degrees. This position allows for the arm action to assist
in producing sufficient propulsive forces to overcome static
inertia.
On completion of setup , lean the entire body forward so that
60% of the body weight is on the front leg. Avoid breaking at
the waist during this shift. The athlete should continue to feel
balanced and stable.
Movement Phase
After body weight has been transferred, the athlete can initiate
the sprint through an aggressive push down and through the
ground via the f ront or driv e leg.
1498
The back leg should also assist in force production but will leave
the ground earlier due to the starting stance position. Arm
action should be synchr onous wi th leg action.
Technique Tips
Cue the athlete to maximiz e accelerative mechanics through a
low heel recovery of the rear or swing leg. This should be
staged through the proper setup of the crouched starting
position described earl ier.
Coach the athlete to continue aggressively pushing against the
ground alongsi de an arm swing that may be cued to emphasiz e
a hand that is pulled down and back. Arm action often parallels
movements of the legs.
The torso should remain tall and tight with the head in a neutral
position. The torso and head are in line and will rise at the
same r ate as the hips gr adual ly rise.
Agility Drills
  8  DECELERATION DRILL
The deceler ation drill requires the athlete to reduce horizontal
momentum (negativ e acceleration) across a series of foot contacts
as an isolated agi lity action or prior to a COD maneuv er (35).
1499
Task
The athlete initiates a linear acceleration from a two-point static
position and sprints to a predetermined distance (i.e., 5, 10, or
20 yards or meters) before braking and deceler ating over a
series of steps as r apidly as possible.
Progressions and Regressions
Tasks can begin submaxima lly, preplanned, and over smaller
approach distances and thus velocity before increasing intent
and increasing  approach distances and subsequent velocities,
and momentum . Deceler ation drills can be further developed
through the use of generic and sport-speci fic stimul i. For
example, the “Stop at the Lights” game is a game-based agility
drill in which the athletes must react to the green (accelerate)
and red (deceler ate) signals  from the coach. Athletes race to
the end and are disqual ified if they are unable to stop on
command. Additional ly, drills can be further developed through
the use of auditory stimul i (i.e., “stop”) and partner or opponent
stimul i.
Variations
Practitioners can vary the initiation positions and planes of
motion (two-p oint, three-po int, falling, false step, amplitude
jump, crossover cut, pivot, torso rotation, drop step, pop steps)
and develop a range of different deceler ation actions to improve
movement solutions. Deceler ation positions include the
following:
Bilateral (athletic r eady posi tion)
Split posi tion
Transverse ( jockey posi tion)
Lateral deceler ation posi tion
Diagonal (cr ossover)
1500
  9  Y AGILITY DRILL
The Y agility drill requires the athlete to plant his or her foot laterally
opposi te to the direction of travel to create a propulsiv e impulse into
the new intended direction (35). Cutting is the key movement with
this dri ll.
Task
The athlete initiates a linear acceleration from a two-point static
position and sprints linearly to a predetermined distance (e.g., 5
yards or meters) and then performs a side-step cutting action
45 degrees to the left or right and accelerates a further 5 yards
or meters (or al ternativ e distance).
1501
Progressions and Regressions
Tasks can begin submaximal, preplanned, and applied over
smaller approach distances and, therefore, involve lower
approach velocities. The drill can then be progressed by
performing it maximal ly or by increasing the approach
distances, which would lead to greater approach velocities and
1502
momentum (thereby increasing the braking demand
experienced prior to and during the dir ectional change).
Y agility drills can be further progressed using generic or sport-
specific stimul i. For example, the drill can be adapted whereby
the athletes must react to auditory or visual stimul i when
approaching the turning area, such as a color cone or auditory
command (i.e., left or right). Moreover, the tasks can be further
developed by incorpor ating a sport-speci fic stimul i such as an
opponent and alternating between leading (attacking) and
following (def ending) thr ough the use of mirr or dri lls.
Variations
To improve movement solutions and create betwee n-skill
variabi lity and an adaptable performer , practitioners can vary
1503
the cutting techniques performed at the turning point during
preplanned and Y-shaped agility tasks. Alternativ e cuts include
the following:
Crossover cut. The athlete positions the plant foot on the
same side (ipsilateral) of the new direction (or sometimes
medial ly across the pelvic midline) and then crosses the
opposi te leg (contr alater al) in front of the body for the new
step in the new direction, accelerating in the same direction
of the push-of f leg (35).
Split step cut. The athlete performs a small jump (ampl itude
jump) before push-of f, landin g with both feet greater than or
equal to shoulder -width apart (not shown; it would come
after the second photo), and then, on landing, the
contralater al limb is used for push-of f into the intended
direction of tr avel (35).
1504
  10  MULTIPLANAR ACCELERATION
INITIATION BOX DRILL
This drill requires starting movements to accelerate the athlete in a
new dir ection (i.e. , forward, sidew ays, rearward).
Task
1505
The athlete starts in the center of a 5 × 5-yard or -meter box
and initiates an acceleration from a static position in a new
direction (i.e., forward, sidew ays, rearward) before decele rating
at the specific cone or zone. The athlete should begin
submaximal ly developing his or her ability to accelerate forward,
sidew ays, and rearward and practice a range of different
movements as outl ined her e:
Starting and accelerating forward (static initiation).  Bilateral
to false step, two-point stagger ed, three-point stance,
prone, kneeling, supine, two-point stagger ed with torso
rotation
Starting and accelerating sidew ays (static initiation).  Jab
step (side-step cut), split step (ampl itude jump), shuffle
step, crossover or pivot, kneeling, two-point stagger ed with
torso r otation
Starting and accelerating rearward (static initiation).  Pivot,
drop or pop turn, turns from nondominant and dominant
sides
1506
Progressions and Regressions
Multiplanar acceleration initiations to deceler ations can be
further developed using generic and sport-speci fic stimul i. For
example, multiplanar acceleration initiation box drills can be
progressed whereby the athletes must react to an auditory or
visual stimulus  when initiating their acceleration, such as a color
cone or auditory command (e.g., left, right, forward, rear left,
rear right) (figur e a). The tasks can be further developed by
incorpor ating a sport-speci fic stimul i such as an opponent and
alternating between leading (attacking) and following
(defending) through the use of mirror drills whereby the
defender has to mirror and copy the initiation movement and
direction of tr avel (figur e b).
1507
  11  EVASION DRILL
Task
Using a 10 × 10-yard (or -meter) box, the purpose of this open
drill from an attacking perspectiv e is to create space, take
space, create separ ation, evade an opponent, and penetrate
defensive lines accurately and efficiently and entering a specific
end zone (e.g., 1v1 evasive drill with two gates). A range of
different COD actions, deceler ation actions, or simply linear or
curvilinear speed actions could be performed to achiev e the
objectiv e. Conversely , from a defensive perspectiv e, the aim is
to prevent the attacker from penetr ating the defensive line and
entering the end zones, limiting space for the attacker,
potential ly making a tag, or delaying the opponent. The
defender is encour aged to identi fy kinematic and postur al cues
and anticipate and r eact to the opponent.
1508
Progressions and Regressions
A range of different mechanical and perceptual-cogni tive factors
can be manipulated within agility drills, which can create
variation, new learning environments, and problems to solve
while also influencing the task complexi ty and cogni tive loading,
which are summariz ed in table 20.7 (page 666). For example,
the pitch dimensions could be expanded (figur e a), which  can
increase the entry and exit velocities and momentums with a
variation in end zones for the attacker to target. To increase
game representativ eness, the addition of static mannequ ins or
defenders can further replicate the chaotic environments that
are often encounter ed in sports such as American footbal l
(figur e b). Finally, most multidirectional sports have multiple
attackers and defenders; thus, to increase specificity, 2v2 small-
sided games (and other configur ations) also can be used to
work on attacking and defensive transitions, organization, and
communication (figur e c).
1509
KEY TERMS
acceleration
actual ization
agility
backpedal ing
backw ard running
braking impulse
braking phase
1510
change of dir ection
coordinativ e overload
deceler ation
dynamic corr espondence
force
ground contact time
ground pr eparation
impulse
impulse–momentum r elationship
initiation
maneuv erability
momentum
negativ e acceleration
perception– action coupl ing
perceptual-cogni tive
periodization
propulsiv e phase
rate of f orce dev elopment (RFD)
recovery
scalar quanti ty
speed
spring–mass model (SMM)
sprinting
step f requency
step length
strength
stretch-shortening cy cle (S SC)
stride
transition
vector quanti ty
velocity
STUDY QUESTIONS
1511