# Section 21.2

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 21: Program Design and Technique for Aerobic Endurance and Metabolic Training

**Section:** 21.2 -- Metabolic Conditioning

**PDF Pages:** 1536--1555

Types of Aerobic Endurance Training
Programs
Several types of aerobic endur ance training programs exist, each
with varying frequency , intensi ty, duration, and progression
parameters. Each type incorpor ates the five design variables and
results in regimens created for specific outcomes. Table 21.4
summariz es the types of aerobic endur ance training and their
common prescriptiv e guidel ines. Sample training programs for each
type of aerobic endur ance training are included after the sections
that f ollow.
TABLE 21.4  Types of Aerobic Endurance Training
Training typeFrequency per
week*Duration (work
bout portion) Intensity
Extensiv e
endur ance1-2 Race distance or
longer (~30-120
min)≤65% of  V̇O2max
Pace/tempo 1-2 ~20-30 min At the L T; at or sl ightly
above race pace
Interval 1-2 3-5 min (wi th a
work:r est ratio of
1:1)Close to  V̇O2max
High-intensi ty
interv al training1 30-90 s (wi th a
work:r est ratio of
1:5)Greater than  V̇O2max
Fartlek 1 ~20-60 min Varies between LSD and
pace/tempo tr aining
intensi ties
*The other days of the week are composed of other training types and rest or recovery
days or sessions.
Data from Lamb (1995); Penteado et al. (2014); Svedenhag (2008); Wells and Pate
(1995).
1536
Extensive Endurance Training
Many aerobic endur ance coaches and athletes over the years have
used the term long, slow distance (LSD)  or high-volume training
to reflect training for a long period of time at a slow pace. Howev er,
this term can give the wrong impression of what an athlete is
actual ly trying to achiev e—that is, to extend their aerobic endur ance
capabi lities, not just exercise slowly for a long duration. Hence, the
term extensive endurance training  is a more appropriate term
and the one used in this text. Irrespectiv e of the term used, a
common factor with extensiv e endur ance training is that the training
distance should be greater than race distance, or the duration should
be at least as long as 30 minutes to 2 hours (98). Howe ver, as the
race distance increases, it is not practical to complete an extensiv e
endur ance training session greater than the race distance. For
example, because of the level of fatigue and tissue damag e, it is not
recommended for athletes to run 26 miles (42 km) or greater in
training before running a marathon. What the athlete relies on in
this situation is a combination  of his or her extensiv e endur ance runs
plus the accumulation of the training  volume over the weeks of
training before the event. The length of an extensiv e endur ance
session will vary according to the training status of the athlete,
where the athlete is in the program, the mode of exercise (e.g.,
cycling vs. running), as wel l as the dur ation of the aer obic endur ance
event for which he or she is training. Gener ally, as the distance
increases from a short (e.g., 5,000 m) to a long (e.g., 26.2-mi le
marathon) or ultradistance aerobic endur ance event, the concept of
running the race distance or greater becomes less likely and
unnecessary . However, it also should be noted that doing greater
than the race distance at the lower end of the aerobic endur ance
distances (e.g., 5,000 m, 10,000 m, or short-distance triathlons) can
be beneficial and is often undertak en.
An extensiv e endur ance training session is typical ly completed at
an intensi ty equiv alent to training zone two (refer to table 21.1 on
page 697). This intensi ty is typical ly characteriz ed as “conversation”
1537
exercise, with the athlete able to talk without undue respiratory
distress, or at a speed that the athlete feels they could run
indefini tely. In gener al, increases in duration are prioritized when
programming extensiv e endurance training sessions into a training
program. It is important to not substantial ly increase the speed of
the extensiv e endur ance sessions in combination with increases in
session duration, for as speed increases the stress of the session
also increases, which in turn lengthens the posttraining recovery
time and therefore can also increase the risk of overtraining or
injury . The physiological benefi ts derived from extensiv e endur ance
training primari ly include enhanced cardiovascular and
thermor egulatory function, improved mitochondrial energy
production and oxidativ e capaci ty of skeletal muscle, and increased
use of fat as a fuel (15, 20, 64, 75, 83, 85, 96, 104, 136, 140, 142).
These changes  are likely to improve the LT intensi ty by enhancing
the body’s ability to clear lactate. Chronic use of this type of training
also causes a change in the metabol ic characteristics of the involved
muscles (27) and an eventual shift of type IIx fibers to type I fibers
(103, 124).
The increase in fat use also causes a sparing of the body’s limited
muscle glycogen reserv es (60, 64, 69, 136). The intensi ty during
extensiv e endur ance training is lower than the intensi ty used during
competi tion. Howev er, extensiv e endur ance training does not
stimulate the neurological patterns of muscle fiber recruitment that
are required during a race (136), and this may result in adaptations
in muscle fibers that ar e not used during competi tion.
Aerobic endur ance training should not be based solely on
extensiv e endur ance training but be combined with other training
methods such as interv al and pace/tempo training to train race pace
endur ance, and improve LT and exercise econom y, thereby ensuring
a complete aerobic endur ance-trained athlete. Even elite distance
running athletes recogniz e the benefi t of this practice, running
approximately 80% of total running distance at extensiv e endur ance
pace over the training year but also incorpor ating various other
1538
types of speed training (59). This ensur es the athlete is not only
more aerobical ly efficient and has muscular endur ance but also has
race speed capabi lities. It is also worth noting that extensiv e
endur ance sessions provide athletes with mental strength and
stamina by experiencing extended periods of time exercising, which
they wi ll encounter on r ace da y.
Pace/Tempo Training
Pace/tempo training  emplo ys an intensi ty at or slightly higher
than race competi tion intensi ty. The intensi ty corresponds
approximately to the maximal lactate steady state; therefore, this
type of training is also often called threshold training  or aerobic–
anaerobic interval trainin g (98). There are two ways to conduct
pace/tempo training: steady and intermi ttent (98). Steady
pace/tempo training is continuous training conducted at an intensi ty
equal to the maximal lactate steady state for durations of
approximately 20 to 30 minutes. The purpose of pace/tempo training
is to stress the athlete at a specific intensi ty and improve energy
production from both oxidative and nonoxidativ e metabol ism.
Intermi ttent pace/tempo training is also referred to as tempo
intervals , cruise interv als, or threshold training (98). During
intermi ttent pace/tempo training, the intensi ty is the same as for a
steady -threshold workout, but the training session consists of a
series of shorter interv als with brief recovery periods between work
interv als. During pace/tempo training, it is important to avoid
exercising at a higher intensi ty than the prescribed pace, assuming
the prescribed  pace is an accurate reflection of maximal lactate
steady state. If the workout seems relatively easy, it is better to
increase the distance than to increase the intensi ty. The primary
objectiv e for this type of training is to develop a sense of race pace
and enhance the body systems’ ability to sustain exercise at that
pace. Pace/tempo training involves the same pattern of muscle fiber
recruitment as is required in competi tion. The benefi ts derived from
1539
this type of training include improved running econom y and
increased L T and MLS S.
Interval Training
Interval training  involves exercise at intensi ties close to V̇O2max.
The work interv als should last between 3 and 5 minutes , although
they can be as short as 30 seconds (3). The rest interv als for 3- to
5-minute work interv als should be equal to the work interv al,
thereby keeping the work-to-rest ratio (W:R) at 1:1. Interval training
permi ts the athlete to train at intensi ties close to V̇O2max for a
greater amount of time than would be possible in a single exercise
session at a continuous high intensi ty. This type of training should
not be performed until a firm base of aerobic endur ance training has
been attained (74). Interval training is very stressful on the athlete
and should be used sparing ly. The benefi ts derived from interv al
training includ e an increased V̇O2max and enhanced anaer obic
metabol ism.
High-Intensity Interval Training
High-intensity interval training  (HIIT) is a form of training that
uses repeated high-intensi ty exercise bouts above MLSS or critical
V̇O2 interspersed with brief recovery periods (76). One high-intensi ty
interv al training protocol is Tabata train ing. This method ology
requires athletes to train at an intensi ty high enough to result in
exhaustion after 7 to 8 repetitions of 20 seconds of work with 10
seconds rest between exercise periods (129). HIIT has been shown
to provide a number of benefi ts to aerobic endur ance performance
in recreational to well-trained  athletes (53, 92, 137). Resear ch has
shown that HIIT may result in increases in V̇O2max in beginner (137)
and trained athletes (92); howev er, in well-trained athletes the
results are less clear (97). The observ ed improvements may be, at
least in part, the result of increases in mitochondrial biogenesis and
function contributing to increased aerobic metabol ism (67, 79). HIIT
has also been associated with improvements in LT (48, 92) and
1540
exercise econom y (48, 53), which have both been strongly
associated with aerobic endur ance performance. In cases where
improvements in aerobic endur ance performance or factors
associated with this performance are similar from HIIT and
traditional low-intensi ty aerobic training, HIIT provides an advantage
by taking signi ficantly less time to complete (23).
According to Buchhei t and Laursen (22), for an optimal stimulus it
is neces sary for athletes to spend a total of several minutes within
the HIIT sessio n above 90% of the V̇O2max. Both short (<45 s) and
long (2- to 4-min) HIIT interv als can be used to elicit different
training responses. For example, shorter interv als with higher
intensi ty may elicit positive changes in neuromuscular power and
exercise econom y, and as the work duration for a single exercise
bout is increased, the energy contribution from fast glycolysis will
likely increase along with blood lactate levels, which may stimulate
improvements in lactate metabol ism.
In performing HIIT, the appropriate amount of rest between
repetitions is critical. If the relief interv als are too short, the athlete
will be unable to put forth a quality effort on subsequent exercise
bouts and also will be at a greater risk for injury . If the rest periods
are too long, many of the benefi ts experienced from challenging the
glycolytic energy system will likely diminish. An example of an
appropriate work-to-rest ratio for long-interv al HIIT training is ≥2 to
3 minutes at or above 90% V̇O2max, with ≤2 minutes of passive or
low-intensi ty activ e recovery (21, 22, 77).
Fartlek Training
Fartlek training  (the word Fartlek  originates from the Swedish
term for speed play) is a combination of several of the previously
mentioned types of training. Although Fartlek training is gener ally
associated with running, it can also be used for cycling and
swimming. A sample Fartlek run involves easy running (~70%
V̇O2max) combined with either hill work or short, fast bursts of
running (~85-90% V̇O2max) for short time periods. Athletes can
1541
apply this basic format to cycling and swimming by simply combining
extensiv e endurance training, pace/tempo training, and interv al
training. A Fartlek training workout challenges all systems of the
body and may help reduce the boredom and monoton y associated
with daily training. This type of training is likely to enhanc e V̇O2max,
increase the L T, and impr ove exercise econom y and f uel use.
The various  types of training induce different
physiological responses. Ideally, a sound program would
incorporate all types of training into the athlete’s
weekly, monthly, or yearly training schedule.
1542
Application of Program Design to
Training Seasons
The program design variables and the various types of aerobic
endur ance training are applied to athletes’ sport seasons to create a
yearly or season-long training  program. Typical ly, the training year is
divided into phases that include the off-season (sometimes called
base training ), preseason, in-season (sport competi tion), and
postseason (activ e rest). Table 21.5 summariz es the main objectiv es
and the typical program design assignments for each training
season.
TABLE 21.5  Sport Season Objectives and Program
Design Assignments
Sport season ObjectiveFrequency
per weekDuration
or volume Intensity
BEGINNER ATHLETE
Off-season
(base tr aining)Develop sound condi tioning
base3-4 Moder ate to
longLow to
moder ate
Preseason Improve factors important to
aerobic endur ance
performance3-5 Moder ate to
longLow to high
In-season
(competi tion)Maintain f actors important to
aerobic endur ance
performancea3-5 (tr aining
and racing)Short
(training)High
(training)
Moder ate Low or high
Race Moder ate to
aA combination of training formats (i.e., extensiv e endur ance, pace/tempo , and high-
intensi ty interv als of varying distances or duration) are required to maintain aerobic
endur ance, L T, and ex ercise econom y between r aces.
bA combination of training formats (i.e., extensiv e endur ance, pace/tempo , and high-
intensi ty interv als of varying distances or duration) are required to maintain aerobic
endur ance, L T, and ex ercise econom y between r aces.
Data from Lamb (1995); Penteado et al. (2014); Svedenhag (2008); Wells and Pate
(1995).
1543
Sport season ObjectiveFrequency
per weekDuration
or volume Intensity
distance high (r acing)
Postseason
(activ e rest)Recovery from competi tive
season2-3 Short Low
ADVANCED ATHLETE
Off-season
(base tr aining)Develop sound condi tioning
base5-6 Long Low to
moder ate
Preseason Improve factors important to
aerobic endur ance
performance6-7 Moder ate to
longModer ate to
high
In-season
(competi tion)Maintain f actors important to
aerobic endur ance
performance and incr ease
goal r ace pace endur anceb5-6 (tr aining
and racing)Short
(training)Low
(training)
Moder ate Low or high
Race
distanceHigh (r acing)
Postseason
(activ e rest)Recovery from competi tive
season3-5 Short Low
aA combination of training formats (i.e., extensiv e endur ance, pace/tempo , and high-
intensi ty interv als of varying distances or duration) are required to maintain aerobic
endur ance, L T, and ex ercise econom y between r aces.
bA combination of training formats (i.e., extensiv e endur ance, pace/tempo , and high-
intensi ty interv als of varying distances or duration) are required to maintain aerobic
endur ance, L T, and ex ercise econom y between r aces.
Data from Lamb (1995); Penteado et al. (2014); Svedenhag (2008); Wells and Pate
(1995).
Off-Season (Base Training)
The priority in off-season  training is to develop a large base of
cardiorespiratory fitness. Initially, the training program should
progress to be composed of long-dur ation and low-intensi ty
workouts. In the mid- to late off-season, intensi ty and, to a lesser
extent, duration are increased; howev er, it is typical ly recommended
that intermediate and advanced athletes should not increase their
training duration or volume  more than 5% to 10% per week.
1544
Howev er, for beginner athletes who start with a very low training
volume, it may be safe and logical to increase by more than 10%.
For example, an athlete who is new to running may run 1 mile (1.6
km) three times in their first week. By following the 10%
recommendation, the following week would realize an increase of
only a total of 0.3 miles (0.5 km), whereas the athlete should
logical ly be able to absorb more than this—in this case, an additional
0.5 miles (0.8 km) on two separ ate days (i.e., a total of 1 mile [1.6
km] or 33% increase). Similarly, cyclists, by the nature of the
volume of training they engage in as well as the low-impact nature
of their sport, may be able to safely increase their volume by more
than 10%. For example, a beginner cyclist may complete an average
of 25 miles (40 km) in a week. The recommendation would mean
the following week they would increase their volume by a total of
1.25 to 2.5 miles (2-4 km). If this athlete is training at an average
speed of 10 miles per hour (16 km/h), this volume would equate to
an additional 7.5 to 15 minut es, which in both absolute and relative
terms is small. Howev er, it is also important to consider that training
is progressed across many weeks in a training program, and even
small changes  on a week-to-week basis will eventual ly add up to
substantial increases in volume or intensi ty. Therefore, while an
initial increase in volume of >10% may be advisable in some,
continued increases across a training program of more than 5% to
10% per week may create a substantial training stress that exceeds
an athlete’ s maximal tolerable dosage, particularly as the stress from
training accumulates across the training program. Aside from
backgr ound and training status, individual differences in response to
training volume stimul i should also be taken into account. To avoid
injury and optimiz e training adaptations, some athletes will require
more recovery time, including a slower increase in training volume,
than their peers. Monitoring subjectiv e levels of fatigue and
soreness, and objectiv e measur es such as resting heart rate and
heart rate variabi lity, can help guide appropriate increases in training
volume. It should also be noted that increasing training duration too
1545
much too quickly can actual ly lead to decreases in aerobic
endur ance perf ormance (75).
Sample Training Program for a Beginner
Marathon Runner During the Off-Season
(Base Training) Phase
Sunday Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday
Rest
day45 min
Fartlek run30 min
aerobic runRest da y 45 min
aerobic runRest
day60 min
aerobic run
Comments
Frequency . To help combat overtraining or overuse, the aerobic training days should
be spr ead out ev enly during the week to al low recovery between sessions.
Duration. Since the athlete’ s race distance is a marathon, the duration or running
distance of the extensiv e endur ance training sessions should progressively approach
80% to 85% that of the marathon, at least for one of the two aerobic (extensiv e
endur ance) sessions.
Intensi ty. To comp lete the extensiv e endur ance sessions, the athlete should run at a
low intens ity or a slow training pace; high respiratory stress should be avoided. The
aerobic runs should be at zone 1 on the three-zone intensi ty scale (figure 21.1 on
page 701 ) or z one 2 on the fiv e-zone intensi ty scale ( table 21.1  on page 697 ).
Sample Swim Training Program for an
Intermediate 140.6 Triathlete During
the Off-Season (Base Phase)
1546
Sunday Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday
Rest
day45 min
aerobic
swim2 min interv als
@ 80%
V̇O2max/2 min
passiv e
recovery × 8
reps45 min
aerobic swimRest da y
(no swim
workout)1 mile
(1.6 km)
Fartlek
swim45 min
aerobic
swim
This pr ogram has a swim f ocus; the r ace swim distance is 2.4 mi les (3.9 km).
Comments
Frequency . Because the interv al and Fartlek workouts are stressful, these training
sessions should be spr ead out during the week to al low recovery between sessions.
Duration. The intervals are work bouts of 2 minutes with ≤2-minute passiv e recovery
between r epetitions.
Repetitions. The interv als ar e 6 to 10 r eps × 2 minutes.
Intensi ty. The athlete should swim at an intensity (pace) at or above 80% V̇O2max
when completing the work portions of the interv al session. The aerobic swims should
be at zone 1 on the three-zone intensi ty scale (figure 21.1 on page 701) or zone 2 on
the fiv e-zone intensi ty scale ( table 21.1  on page 697 ).
Preseason
During the preseason , the athlete should focus on progressively
increasing training intensi ty, maintaining or reducing duration, and
incorpor ating all types of aerobic training stimul i into the program.
The strengths and weaknesses of the individual athlete should
determine the amount and f requency of each t ype of tr aining.
Sample Training Program for a Beginner
50 Kilometer (31 Mile) Cyclist During
the Preseason Phase
Sunday Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday
Rest
day60 min
aerobic30 min
pace/tempoRest da y 45 min
Fartlek rideRest
day75 min
aerobic ride
1547
Sunday Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday
ride ride
Comments
Frequency . Because  the pace/tempo and Fartlek rides are stressful, these two training
days should be spr ead out during the week to al low recovery between sessions.
Duration. For steady pace/ tempo training, exercise duration is shorter than race
distance or dur ation to al low for a higher tr aining intensi ty.
Intensi ty. The athlete should  cycle at a high intensity or a fast training pace for both
pace/tempo and Fartlek sessions; high respiratory stress is required to simulate race
pace. The aerobic rides should be at zone 1 on the three-zone intensi ty scale (figure
21.1 on page 701 ) or z one 2 on the fiv e-zone intensi ty scale ( table 21.1  on page 697 ).
Sample Training Program for an
Intermediate 10 Kilometer (6.2 Mile)
Runner During the Late Preseason Phase
Sunday Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday
Rest
day10 reps of
0.5 km (0.3
mi) interv als
at race pace
with a 1:1
W:R ratio10 km
(6.2 mi)
easy run45 min
aerobic runHIIT 3 min @
90%
V̇O2max/2
min passiv e
recovery × 6
reps45 min
aerobic
run45 min
Fartlek run
on flat
course
Comments
Frequency . Because  the interv al runs are stressful, these training sessions should be
spread out during the week to al low recovery between sessions.
Duration. The total distance  or duration of the training portion of the session (i.e., the
sum of the interv al work bouts) should approach the competi tion distances as the
athlete becomes mor e highly tr ained.
Intensi ty. The athlete should run at an intens ity (pace) close to or above LT when
completing the work bout portions of the interv al training sessions. The aerobic runs
should be at zone 1 on the three-zone intensi ty scale (figure 21.1 on page 701) or
zone 2 on the fiv e-zone intensi ty scale ( table 21.1  on page 697 ).
1548
In-Season (Competition)
The in-season  training program needs to be designed to include
competi tion or race days in the training schedule. Low-intensi ty and
short-duration training days should precede scheduled competi tions
so that the athlete is fully recovered and rested. The types of
training emplo yed during the in-season are based on the continued
goal of improving weaknesses and maintaining strengths of the
athlete.
Sample Training Program for a 5
Kilometer (3.1 Mile) Collegiate Cross-
Country Runner During the In-Season
Phase
Sunday Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday
Rest or
easy run60 min
aerobic
run45-min
Fartlek run
of har d/easy
work on hi lls
and flats20 min
pace/tempo
run30 min
aerobic run
with race
pace pickups20 min
aerobic
run wi th
race pace
pickupsCompeti tion
Comments
Frequency . Because  Fartlek and tempo runs are stressful, no more than two in total
should oc cur during the week.
Duration. The total distance  or duration of the training portion of the session (i.e., the
sum of the interv al work bouts) should approach the competi tion distance as the
athlete becomes mor e highly tr ained.
Intensi ty. The athlete should run at an intensi ty (pace) close to V̇O2max when
completing the work bout portions of the Fartlek training sessions and LT for the
tempo run. The aerobic runs should be at zone 1 on the three-zone intensity scale
(figure 21.1 on page 701) or zone 2 on the five-zone intensi ty scale (table 21.1 on
page 697 ).
1549
Postseason (Active Rest)
During the postseason , the main focus should be on recovering
from the previous competi tive season. Low training duration and
intensi ty are typical for this active rest phase, but enough overall
exercise or activity should be performed to maintain a sufficient level
of cardiorespiratory fitness, muscular strength, and lean body mass.
During the postseason, the aerobic endur ance athlete should focus
on rehabi litating injuries incurr ed during the competi tive season and
improving the str ength of weak or under condi tioned muscle gr oups.
A sound year-round aerobic endurance training program
should be divided into sport seasons with specific goals
and objectives designed to improve performance
gradually and progressively.
1550
Special Issues Related to Aerobic
Endurance Training
In addition to the program design variables, it is important to
consider other related issues when developing an aerobic endur ance
training program. These include cross-tr aining, detraining, tapering,
and supplemental resistance training. The strength and condi tioning
professional should contemplate these issues when adapting the
types of aerobic endur ance training programs to an individual athlete
or developing an aerobic endur ance program based on the sport
season.
Cross-Training
Cross-training  is a mode of training that can be used to maintain
gener al condi tioning in athletes during periods of reduced training
due to injury or during recovery from a training cycle (96). Cross-
training may reduce the likelihood of overuse injuries because it
distributes the physical stress of training to muscle groups different
from those used during training (122). Multiple-ev ent athletes also
use cross-training to maximiz e performance in swimming, cycling,
and running. The benefi ts derived from cross-tr aining include
adaptations of the respiratory, cardiovascular , and musculoskeletal
systems (88, 122). It seems reasonable to expect that cross-training
would maintain some level of condi tioning in single-ev ent athletes
who perform another mode of training (e.g., runners who perform
cycling or swimming). To be effective in maintaining V̇O2max, cross-
training must be equal in intensi ty and duration to the athlete’ s
primary mode of exercise; howev er, cross-tr aining will not improve
single-ev ent performance to the same magni tude as mode-speci fic
training only (96).
Detraining
Detraining  occurs when the athlete reduces the training duration or
intensi ty or stops training altogether due to a break in the training
1551
program, injury , or illness. In the absence of an appropriate training
stimulus, the athlete experiences a loss of the physiological
adaptations brought about by training. It has been demonstr ated
that most of the physiological adaptations attained with training
regress rapidly toward pretraining levels when the training stimulus
is removed (5, 102). To avoid some of the effects of detraining, the
use of other training mode s may be beneficial; howev er, cross-
training may only attenuat e some of the loss of physiological
adaptation normal ly seen during complete cessation of training.
Aerobic endur ance athletes can minimiz e the effects of detraining by
continuing to use their primary mode of exercise at reduced
frequency and intensi ty, if possible (136).
Tapering
Tapering  is an importa nt component  of the training program as
aerobic endur ance athletes prepare for major competi tion. Tapering
involves the systematic reduction of training duration and intensi ty,
combined with an increased emphasis on technique work and
nutritional interv ention. The objectiv e of tapering the training
regimen is to attain peak performance at the time of competi tion.
While the duration of the taper depends on numer ous factors, a
typical tapering period may last between 7 and 28 days (91).
Although most of the available resear ch on tapering has been
conducted on swimmers (95, 126, 131), the use of tapering is not
limited to these aerobic endur ance athletes. Resear ch among
runners and cyclists has shown that these aerobic endur ance
athletes also benefi t from a well-planned tapering regime n (18, 91).
Tapering before competi tion helps facilitate recovery and rehydration
and pr omotes incr eases in muscle and l iver gly cogen stor es (91).
Several types of tapering models may be emplo yed by athletes in
order to restore impair ed physiological capaci ties resulting from the
rigors of training. The most common tapering models are linear,
step, and progressive tapers (131). The linear taper is characteriz ed
by a gradual decrease in the overall daily training volume throughout
1552
the duration of the taper. In contrast, a step taper is typified by an
abrupt and consider able reduction (normal ly ≥50%) in training
volume that is maintained throughout the duration of the taper
without fluctuation. The progressive taper uses a combina tion of the
linear and step tapering models. This model is associated with a
rapid 10% to 15% immediate reduction in training volume, with
smaller, more gradual reductions in volume at each tier. Training
volume is systematical ly reduced while intensi ty and frequency are
maintained.
Concurrent Aerobic Endurance Training
and Resistance Training
Resistance training is an important but often overlook ed factor in
improving performance in aerobic endur ance athletes. This may be
due to misconceptions that resistance training may increase an
athlete’ s nonfunctional muscle mass and thereby decrease
performance, or the potenti al interference phenomenon that may
occur when resistance and aerobic endur ance training sessions are
completed within a training program (i.e., concurrent training )
(35). Howev er, apart from the well-known benefi ts that resistance
training can provide athletes, such as reducing muscle imbalances,
assistance with preventing overuse injuries, and recovery from
injuries (122), numer ous research investigations (25, 32, 45, 82, 84,
109, 114, 119, 127, 135), meta- analyses, and systematic review
articles (1, 4, 10, 11, 17, 31, 37, 38, 65, 80, 89, 116, 143) have
demonstr ated that it can also improve performance (e.g., time trial,
middle- and long-distance) across a number of aerobic endur ance
discipl ines including running, cycling, cross-country skiing, and
swimming, and performanc e-related variables such as strength,
power , running econom y, and maximal sprint speed. For example, a
systematic review found that resistance training not only improved
running performance from distances of 1,500 meters (0.9 mile) to
10,000 meters  (6.2 miles) but also improved muscular strength and
power factors as well as running econom y (1). More specifically,
1553
both heavy resistance training and explosiv e or plyometric training
have been found to be effective training methods to concurrently
train with aerobic endur ance training to improve running econom y
(10, 31). Improvements in running econom y and performance
following heavy resistance training and plyometric training are
primari ly related to an increase in strength of the muscles used
during running thereby reducing the relative intensi ty of the load of
the exercising muscles (43). Plyometric training, which uses the
stretch-shortening cycle, not only improves the storage and elastic
energy properties of the exercising muscles but assists them to work
more efficiently (86). It is important to note that maximal strength
training has been found to produce greater benefi ts than
submaximal strength training or maximal power training, with
submaximal strength training  producing the least gains of all other
methods (10).
It is also worth highlighting that no signs of overtraining (1) or
significant increases in body mass (1, 17), maximal oxygen uptak e
(17), or blood lactate markers (17) have been associated with the
aerobic performance improvements for the majori ty of concurr ent
training studies. Howev er, not all concurr ent training studies (143)
have resulted in improvements in aerobic endur ance performance
measur es. The differences between studies is often due to the
choice of resistance training exercises (e.g., high vs. low intensi ty,
explosiv e or plyometric) (80), characteristics of the participants, and
methods used to measur e performance improvements (17). It is also
worth noting that studies that reported no improvement in running
econom y often used a lower frequency of resistance training
sessions (17) and shorter duration concurr ent training programs (31,
38).
Exercise Selection
Most studies found that athletes who have benefi ted from
concurr ent training used free weight, multijoint exercises (17). This
benefi t may be r elated to the higher lev el of muscle coor dination and
1554
hence neuromuscular stimulus experienced with free weights
compar ed to machine-based or single-joint exercises (17). For those
studies involving running, the benefi t may also be related to the
greater transference from the resistance training environment to the
running movement due to the biomechanical similarity between the
two (17). High- velocity movements including plyometric exercises
such as hops, bounds, jumps, drop jumps, and squat jumps have
shown to have a positive impact on aerobic endur ance performance
measur es (31, 38). For more information, refer to chapters 18 and
19 for program design and technique detai ls.
Training Intensity and Frequency
A common finding of concurr ent training resear ch for improving
aerobic endur ance performance is the use of heavy resistance
training or plyometric training by athletes two or three times per
week (10, 17) or a combination of both (4, 31, 38). Howev er, to
reduce the impact of a resistance training session on a subsequent
aerobic endur ance training session (i.e., residual fatigue, muscle
soreness, and physiological disturbance), the volume should be
reduced to limit the potenti al carryover of fatigue caused by the
resistance training session (35). That is, keep the loads high (e.g.,
≥90% of 1RM or ≤4RM) (38) but the weekly volume low (31). It is
also worth noting that strength developed during a preparatory
phase has been found to be maintained for up to 12 weeks with just
one resistance training session per week thereafter (111), thus
allowing athlet es to maintain strength gains throughout subsequent
training phases wi th minimal time commi tment.
Recovery Time Between Concurrent Training Sessions
The level of recovery during a concurr ent training program is
influenced not only by the intensity, frequency , and duration of the
individual training sessions but also the mode of aerobic endur ance
training (e.g., running vs. cycling) and type of resistance training
performed (e.g., velocity of movement) (35). The shorter the
1555