# Section 21.4

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 21: Program Design and Technique for Aerobic Endurance and Metabolic Training

**Section:** 21.4 -- Program Integration

**PDF Pages:** 1571--1578

machine causes the r ear heel to l ift.
The knees should not be allowed to come forward past the toes
when in the flex ed posi tion.
Hold onto the handr ails in order to maintain balance. If handr ail
holding is unnecessary , it is a good idea to release the hold on
the handrails and pump the arms similarly to the way they
move in w alking or running.
The incline of the elliptical may be increased to more closely
simulate a running motion or reduced to replicate a walking
motion.
Performing this exercise with a forward motion may place
greater emphasis on the quadriceps; performing it with a
backw ard motion may increase the stress on the hamstrings
and gluteals.
Ending Position
Slow down until the machine has come to a complete stop, then
step of f the pedals.
COMMON ERRORS
Lifting the heels and applying too much pressure via the
forefoot; use the whole pedal to distribute pressure
when applying force to the pedals
Leaning on the handrails, which disengages the core
muscles and affects movement phase execution; if
necessary to hold on for balance, ensure an upright
posture is always maintained and the core is engaged,
and avoid placing hands too low on the handrails, which
can cause a forward lean
1571
  6  WALKING (GAIT)
Body Position
Hold the head upright wi th the ey es looking str aight ahead.
Relax the shoulders, and do not al low them to r ound.
Position the upper body directly over the hips while keepin g the
ear, shoulder , and hip al igned.
Foot Strike
The heel should strike the ground first, followed by a gentle
rolling heel-to-bal l action, allowing the weight to be spread over
the foot.
The weight should transfer from the outer side of the heel and
continue to shift forward and slightly inward toward the middle
of the bal l of the f oot at push-of f.
Stride
1572
Without rolling the pelvis (unless racewalking), allow the hips to
move freely to incr ease stride length.
Lift the knees and engag e the hips and gluteals in the
movement.
Arm Action
The arms should swing forward and backw ard in a reciprocating
fashion with the lower body (i.e., when the left arm is forward,
the right leg is extended, and vice v ersa).
The shoulders should be relaxed, allowing the arms to swing
freely.
At faster w alking speeds, the actions should be as f ollows:
The arms should be flexed at the elbows and maintained at
90 degr ees wi th arm mo vement originating at the shoulders.
The arms and hands should swing backw ard and forward,
not crossing the midline of the body, in order to create
forward propulsion.
The hands should stay relaxed, with the hand coming up to
the level of the chest at the nipple line on the forward swing
and the hip bone at the side of the body on the backw ard
swing.
Note:  Racewalkers must increase hip rotation with each stride to
create a pelvic roll. This enables them to increase stride length while
keeping one foot in contact with the ground at all times per the rules
of the sport.
  7  RUNNING (GAIT)
Body Position
Hold the head upright wi th the ey es looking str aight ahead.
Relax the shoulders, but do not al low them to r ound.
Position the upper body during running with an approximately
2- to 4-degr ee lean from the heels to the athlete’ s head while
keeping the ear , shoulder , and hip al igned.
1573
Foot Strike
The foot should strike the ground slightly in front of or directly
below the athlete’ s center of gravity (i.e., hips), which may be a
heel, mid-, or forefoot strike, followed by a gentle rolling heel-
to-bal l action, allowing the weight to be spread over the foot
during the f oot contact phase.
The weight will likely transfer from the outer side of the heel
and continue to shi ft.
Stride
Without rolling the pelvis (unless racewalking), allow the hips to
move freely to incr ease stride length.
Lift the knees and engag e the hips and gluteals in the
movement.
With each running step, the foot should land approximately
under the hips to avoid braking and minimiz e contact time with
the gr ound.
Arm Action
The arms should swing forward and backw ard in a reciprocating
motion with the lower body (i.e., when the left arm is forward,
the right leg is extended, and vice v ersa).
The shoulders should be relaxed, allowing the arms to swing
freely.
The arms and hands should swing backw ard and forward from
the shoulder , not crossing the midline of the body, in order to
create f orward propulsion.
Arm action of ±20-degr ee oscillation of the hands is acceptable
and ma y impr ove running econom y (91a).
  8  FREESTYLE SWIMMING
Swimming performance is a combination of swimming-speci fic
fitness and technique. Less-than-optimal swimming technique can
significantly and negativ ely affect an athlete’ s performance due to
1574
inefficient stroke execution, increase in drag, or a loss of power
production in the water. While a number of resour ces are available to
assist athletes  and strength and condi tioning professionals to
address these common errors, the best method to improve
swimming performance is to seek expert advice from a qualified
swim coach, who can not only assess fitness and performance
parameters but also advise from a technical perspectiv e how these
areas can be impr oved.
COMMON ERRORS
Swinging hand entry, in which the hand crosses over the
center line on entry into the water
Early hand entry, which results in a short stroke
Poor catch and pull through—keeping the arm straight
when pulling through the water or finishing the stroke
early (i.e., not pulling through the full stroke)
Ineffective breathing technique such as holding the
breath until the head is out of the water or lifting the
head forward to breathe
Incorrect body position such as the hips dropping and
therefore increasing drag due to keeping the head up to
look forward
KEY TERMS
aerobic–anaer obic interv al training
age-pr edicted maximal heart r ate (APMHR)
altitude
base tr aining
concurr ent tr aining
cross-tr aining
cruise interv als
detraining
duration
1575
exercise econom y
extensiv e endur ance tr aining
Fartlek tr aining
frequency
functional capaci ty
heart r ate reserv e (HRR)
high-intensi ty interv al training (HIIT )
in-season
intensi ty
interv al training
Karvonen method
lactate thr eshold
live high, tr ain low (LHTL)
long, slow distance tr aining (LSD)
maximal aer obic capaci ty (V̇O2max)
maximal lactate steady state (MLS S)
maximum toler ated dose (MTD)
metabol ic equiv alent (MET )
minimum ef fective dose (MED)
mode
off-season
pace/tempo tr aining
percentage of maximal heart r ate (MHR) method
postseason
preseason
ratings of per ceived ex ertion (RPE)
recovery
Tabata tr aining
tapering
tempo interv als
threshold tr aining
training speci ficity
STUDY QUESTIONS
1576
  1.  Which of the following is not an adaptation following exposur e
to a heat ac climation pr otocol?
  a.  incr ease in cutaneous blood flow
  b.  incr ease in plasma v olume
  c.  onset of sweating at a lower cor e temper ature
  d.  less di lute sweat
  2.  Al l the following statements concerning heat acclimation for
aerobic endur ance tr aining ar e corr ect, ex cept f or which one?
  a.  Most heat adaptations ar e reported to oc cur wi thin the
first four to six da ys of heat exposur e.
  b.  Athletes wi th a lower lev el of aer obic fi tness can acquir e
heat adaptations mor e rapidly as wel l as retain them
longer than those athletes wi th a higher lev el of aer obic
fitness.
  c.  Heat ac climatization pr otocols should be pr acticed months
before competi tion in the heat.
  d.  Heat exposur e training f requency is important because
adaptations oc cur mor e rapidly wi th days of consecutiv e
exposur e.
  3.  Which of the following statements is not true concerning
concurr ent tr aining?
  a.  Most studies f ound that athletes who ha ve benefi ted from
concurr ent tr aining ha ve used machine- and single-joint -
oriented ex ercises only .
  b.  Hea vy resistance tr aining and explosiv e or ply ometric
training b y athletes two to thr ee times per week ha ve
been f ound to impr ove aerobic endur ance perf ormance.
  c.  The lev el of r ecovery following concurr ent tr aining
sessions ma y be influenced not only b y the intensi ty,
frequency , and dur ation of the individual tr aining sessions
but by the mode of aer obic endur ance tr aining and t ype of
resistance tr aining perf ormed.
  d.  The tr aining sequence should be v aried thr oughout the
phases of the tr aining y ear to r eflect what is most
1577
important during that phase of tr aining.
  4.  Enhanced cardiovascular and thermor egulatory function,
improved mitochondrial energy production and oxidativ e
capaci ty of skeletal muscle, and increased use of fat as a fuel
are all physiological benefi ts of what type of aerobic
endur ance tr aining?
  a.  intensiv e pace tr aining
  b.  interv al training
  c.  tempo tr aining
  d.  extensiv e endur ance tr aining
  5.  HIIT may contribute to performance in highly trained aerobic
endur ance athletes via several improvements including which
of the f ollowing?
  a.  impr ovements in peak power output
  b.  lowering of the v entilatory thr eshold
  c.  decr eased use of f at as a f uel sour ce
  d.  reduced h ydrogen ion buf fering
1578