# Chapter 22: Periodization

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

**PDF Pages:** 1579--1629

CHAPTER  22
PERIODIZATION
G. Gregory Haff, PhD
The author would like to acknowledge the significant contributions of Dan Wathen, Thomas R. Baechle,
and R oger W . Earle to this chapter .
After completing this chapter, you will be able to
understand the centr al concepts that underpin the periodization of tr aining;
appreciate the v alue, r ole, and appl ication of periodization in str ength and
condi tioning pr ograms;
describe the f our periods of the tr aditional periodization model;
describe the two phases of the pr eparatory period of the tr aditional
periodization model;
relate the f our sport seasons to the f our periods of the tr aditional
periodization model; and
apply the pr ogram design v ariables to cr eate a periodiz ed str ength tr aining
program.
The ability to guide the training process and implement programming strategies
that enhance the athlete’ s potential for achieving the highest level of performance
at targeted time points is largely affected by the long- and short-term
programming strategies implemented by the strength and condi tioning
professional (69). The process of organizing these programming strategies is
gener ally referred to as periodization . The basic concepts assoc iated with
periodization can be traced to ancient philosophers and physicians, such as Galen
(also known as Clausius Aelius Galenus), who presented  the first description of
the application  of periodiz ed strength training methods, and Lucius Flavius
Philostratus, who presented a structur ed pre-Olympic training model (28, 50). In
the modern Olympic era periodization is often attributed to Leonid Matveyev (64),
who in the 1960s proposed the basic theories that underpin periodization. Even
though Matveyev is often considered the father of periodization, it is important to
1579
note that several other individuals were also exploring these concepts at the same
time, including  László Nádori (71), Tudor Bompa (3), and Yuri Verkhoshansky
(102). Later on, American sport scientists Michael H. Stone, Harold O’Bryant, and
John Garhammer adapted the concepts of the early periodization theorists with
special appl ication to str ength and power athletes (89, 91).
While the concepts that underpin our understanding of periodization are well
establ ished and are well accepted, confusion still exists in both the scienti fic (1, 2,
54, 79) and practical (25) literature about what periodizati on is and how it is used
to guide  the training process. At the center of this confusion is the fact that the
terms periodization  and programming  are often used interchangea bly within the
literature (20, 35, 37, 88). While periodization and programming are interr elated,
they represent  different management levels of the training process (35, 38).
Specifically, periodization serves as the macro-management level of the training
process, while programming allows for the micro-management of the process
(38). Conceptu ally, periodiza tion serves as a method for organizing deliberate
practice by providing the scaffold from which programming decisions are made
(60). The objectiv es targeted by the periodiz ed plan are then aligned with training
cycles (e.g., micro-, meso-, and macrocycles, and annual and multiyear cycles)
(73) and individual ized programs are constructed. Programming aligns the
activities under taken (i.e., modes and methods of training) as part of the training
process with the athlete’ s establ ished training goals and the direction of the
training process (41). At the programming level, an integr ated monitoring
program is used to fine-tune  the training activities by providing information that
can further inform decisions about the training strategies implemented as part of
the athlete’s training program (figure 22.1) (22). In this regard, programming
becomes an operation in strategic thinking, with programmatic decisions being
consider ed in the context of the athlete’ s holistic training program (e.g., physical
training, technical and tactica l training, mental skills training, recovery methods,
and nutritional strategies) and the current state (37, 77). Ultimately , when all of
this is taken into account periodization simply serves as an organizational tool for
guiding the dir ection and structur e of the tr aining pr ocess.
1580
FIGURE 22.1  The symbiotic r elationship between periodization, moni toring, and pr ogramming.
Reprinted with permission from G.G. Haff, “Periodization and Programming for Individual Sports,” in NSCA’s Essentials of Sport Science,
edited by D. French and L. Torres Ronda (Human Kinetics, 2022), 29. Based on A.J. Cunanan, B.H. DeWeese, J.P. Wagle, et al., “The General
Adaptation Syndrome: A Foundation for the Concept of Periodization,” Sports Medicine 48 (2018): 787-797.
This chapter discusses the concept of periodization and its application within a
strength and condi tioning program. To understand periodization theories and how
they are applied to training program design, it is essential to develop an
understanding of how the body responds to training (i.e., stressors) (34, 37); this
topic is discussed first. Second, the basic models that are used to plan the
training process are discus sed. Third, the basic hierarchal structur e of a
periodiz ed training program is discussed to demonstr ate how the training year is
broken into smaller blocks of training, each with its own training goals and
priorities. It is important to note that this overall schedule of training
encompasses all aspects of the athletes’ training program, including gener al
condi tioning, sport-speci fic activities, and resistance training. Finally, the second
half of this chapter presents detailed examples of a yearlong periodiz ed strength
and condi tioning program. To understand the intricaci es of programing, the
reader is encour aged to r ead chapter 18  first.
1581
Central Concepts Related to Periodization
A successful training program allows for management of the adaptiv e and
recovery  responses to specific interv entions that are delivered in a structur ed
way (41). The ultimate success of any training program centers on its ability to
induce specific physiological adaptations and translate those adaptations into
increases in performance. At the center of this process is the ability to manage
the adaptive response, handle accumulated fatigue, and capitalize on the
aftereffects establ ished from the various training factors encounter ed. The
strength of a periodiz ed training plan lies in its ability to sequence and structur e
the training interv entions in order to manage all of these factors and peak
performance at appropriate time points (35, 37, 38, 41). Ultimately , peak
performance can be optimiz ed only for short periods of time (7-14 days), and the
average time it can be maint ained is inversely related to the average intensi ty of
the training plan (35, 36). In order to elucidate how periodized training models
can manage these factors, three basic mechanistic  theories have been
establ ished: the general adap tation syndr ome (GAS) , stimulus –fatigue –
recovery –adaptation theory , and the fitness–fatigue paradigm  (35, 38,
41).
Periodization is the logical and systematic process of sequencing
and integrating training interventions in order to manage the
training proc ess and to increase the potential of achieving peak
performance at appropriate time points.
The Genera l Adaptation Syndrome
In the 1930s, Hans Selye, a pioneering resear cher on the biological effects of
exposur e to stressful stimul i, presented the basic concepts of the GAS in which a
three-stage response to stress (alarm, resistance, and exhaustion) was presented
(82). His later work expanded  on these early findings by taking into consider ation
both physical (9, 84, 85) and psychoemotional stress (20, 83, 86). While not
original ly conce ptualized in the context of physical training, over time the GAS has
become one of the foundatio nal concepts used to explain periodization theories
(20, 29, 35). Any time the body experiences a novel, new, or more intense stress
than previously applied (e.g., lifting a heavier training load or a greater volume-
load; see chapter 18), the initial response, or alarm phase, is marked by an
accumulation of fatigue, soreness, stiffness, or reduction in energetic stores that
results in a reduction in performance capaci ty (20, 92). Depending on the
magni tude of the stress encounter ed by the athlete, this response may last
several hours, days, or weeks. After this initial response, the body moves into the
1582
resistance phase, when it adapts to the stimulus and returns to a normal
functional capacity. If the training stress is appropriat ely structur ed and not
excessiv e, these adaptiv e responses can result in specific biochemical, structur al,
and mechanical adjustments that further elevate the athlete’ s performance
capaci ty, resulting in what is termed supercompensation  (91).
An additional factor that modulates the stress response to training is the
athlete’ s psychological and emotional state (95, 96). If the athlete has chronic
elevations in psychological and emotional stress, the magni tude of the fatigue
response will be increased during the alarm phase and the time course for
recovery will be lengthened, resulting in an elongation of the resistance phase,
ultimately resulting in a delayed super compensation response (38). As such, the
strength and condi tioning professional must not only monitor the training loads
the athlete is exposed to but must also consider the athlete’ s current
psychological and emotional state when manipulating training loads within the
periodiz ed training plan. In this regard, the integr ation of a compr ehensiv e
monitoring program can provide additional information that allows that strength
and conditioning professional to better manage the athlet e’s exposur e to training
stress and incr ease the potential f or appr opriate elev ations in perf ormance.
If, however, the stress persists (either physical or psychoemotional) for an
extended period of time, the athlete can move into the exhaustion phase. If this
occurs, the athlete is demons trating an inability to adapt to the imposed stressors
and will present some of the same symptoms noted in the alarm phase.
Ultimately , when athletes reach the exhaustion phase, they are most likely
experiencing overreaching or overtraining responses (see chapter 24 for
additional information) (20). From a training perspectiv e, excessiv e loading,
monotonous training, and overly varied training can all result in the occurrence of
the exhaustion phase. Additionally, the responses to training can be affected by
other nontraining-r elated stress (e.g., occupational issues, insufficient sleep,
relationship , poor diet) that can contribute to the overall stress level experienced
by the athlete. Ultimately , the strength and condi tioning professional should strive
to avoid the occurrence of this phase of the GAS through the proper planning,
management (periodization), and monitoring of training stressors. Although the
actual dimensions (i.e., slope, magni tude, and timing) of the curve shown in
figure 22.2 are highly individual ized, this figure represents the basic application of
the GA S to tr aining r esponses.
Stimulus–Fatigue–Recovery–Adaptation Theory
The stimulus–f atigue–r ecovery–adaptation theory is an extension of the GAS and
suggests that training stimul i produce a gener al respon se (figure 22.3) that is
influenced by the overall magnitude of the training stressor (38, 92). Specifically,
the greater the overall magni tude of the workload encounter ed, the more fatigue
1583
accumulates and the longer the delay before complete recovery and adaption can
occur. As the athlete recovers from and adapts to the training stimul i, fatigue
dissipates, and preparedness and performance increase. If no new training
stimulus is introduced, a state of involution or detraining (i.e., a reduced overall
capaci ty, to below the current baseline) is observ ed. In contrast, if a new training
stimulus is introduced, the process is repeated. This basic pattern is present
whenev er an athlete is exposed to a training exercise, session, day, or cycle
within a periodiz ed training plan. It should be noted that while recovery is an
important part of the training  process, it is not always necessary to reach a state
of complete recovery before engaging in a new bout or session of training (72).
The manipulat ion of workloads and training intensi ties through use of light and
heavy sessions or days of training can be used to modula te fatigue and recovery
responses (8, 26, 88) while allowing for fitness to be either increased or
maintained. Conceptual ly, this theory serves as the foundation for sequential
periodization models in that these models allow for the manipulation of various
training factors  to modulate the athlete’ s overall fatigue levels, rate of recovery,
and adaptiv e response to the tr aining stimul i.
FIGURE 22.2  The gener al adaptation syndr ome (GA S) and appl ication to periodization.
Adapted by permission from G.G. Haff and E.E. Haff, “Training Integration and Periodization,” in NSCA’s Guide to Program Design, 2nd ed.,
edited for the National Strength and Conditioning Association by M.T. Jones (Human Kinetics, 2024), 257. Adapted from A.J. Cunanan, B.H.
DeWeese, J.P. Wagle, et al., “The General Adaptation Syndrome: A Foundation for the Concept of Periodization,” Sports Medicine 48 (2018):
787-797.; R.W. Fry, A.R. Morton, and D. Keast, “Periodisation of Training Stress-A Review,” Canadian Journal of Sports Science 17 (1992):
234-240.; Stone et al. (1982); Stone et al. (2007).
1584
Fitness–Fatigue Paradigm
Gener ally, a summation of the two primary training aftereffects (i.e., fitness and
fatigue) occurs in response to training interv entions that influence the athlete’ s
level of preparedness (15, 38, 107). In 1995, Zatsiorsky (106) presented the
classic explanation of these relationships as the two-factor model, more
commonly referred to as the fitness–f atigue paradigm  (figure 22.4). Ultimately,
every training bout, session, or cycle creates both fatigue and fitness aftereffects,
which summate to create a state of preparedness (15, 106). When training loads
are the highest , fitness becomes elevated, but because of the high training loads,
a concomi tant increase in fatigue occurs. When fitness and fatigue are summed in
this case, the level of fatigue  results in a reduction in preparedness. On the other
hand, when training workload s are low, little fatigue occurs and minimal fitness is
developed, resulting in a low level of preparedness. Thus, the sequencing of
training loads becomes important in that it allows for training workloads to be
varied in a systematic mann er. An important thing to remember is that fatigue
dissipates at a rate two-thir ds faster than fitness, thus allowing preparedness to
become elevated if appropriate training strategies are used to retain fitness while
reducing fatigue (35, 38, 41). While the fitness–f atigue  paradigm is classical ly
represented as one fatigue, fitness, and preparedness curve, it is likely that each
training factor stimulates its own individual fitness, fatigue, and preparedness
aftereffect response (15, 38, 41). These aftereffects are often consider ed to be
residual training effects and serve as a fundamental concept underlying the use of
sequential periodization models (35, 41). Ultimately , the residual training effects
of one training period have the potential to affect the level of preparedness in
subsequent training periods, depending on the overall structure of the periodiz ed
training plan (35, 41).
1585
FIGURE 22.3  The stimulus–f atigue–r ecovery–adaptation theory , with inter changeable terminology .
Adapted by permission from G.G. Haff and E.E. Haff, “Training Integration and Periodization,” in NSCA’s Guide to Program Design, 2nd ed.,
edited for the National Strength and Conditioning Association by M.T. Jones (Human Kinetics, 2024), 257. Adapted from A.J. Cunanan, B.H.
DeWeese, J.P. Wagle, et al., “The General Adaptation Syndrome: A Foundation for the Concept of Periodization,” Sports Medicine 48 (2018):
787-797.; R.W. Fry, A.R. Morton, and D. Keast, “Periodisation of Training Stress-A Review,” Canadian Journal of Sports Science 17 (1992):
234-240.; Stone et al. (1982); Stone et al. (2007).
1586
FIGURE 22.4  The fi tness–f atigue par adigm.
Adapted by permission from G.G. Haff and E.E. Haff, “Training Integration and Periodization,” in NSCA’s Guide to Program Design, 2nd ed.,
edited for the National Strength and Conditioning Association by M.T. Jones (Human Kinetics, 2024), 260. Adapted from Stone et al. (2007)
and V.M. Zatsiorsky, W.J. Kraemer, and A.C. Fry, Science and Practice of Strength Training, 3rd ed. (Human Kinetics, 2021).
1587
Periodization and Planning the Training Process
The development of a periodiz ed training plan is based on three interdependent
levels: periodization, planning, and pr ogramming ( table 22.1 ).
TABLE 22.1  Interrelationship of Periodization, Planning, and
Programming
Management
level Structure General description Specific description
Macro-
managementPeriodization The bir d’s-eye overview of the pr ogram
direction and goals of the tr aining
process; t ypical ly depicted as the annual
or mul tiyear tr aining planUses the competi tive schedule
to create the scaf fold from
which tr aining is planned and
implemented
Planning Provides the model of periodization used
to guide the tr aining pr ocess and
programmatic decisionsApplies a tr aining model:
parallel, sequential, or emphasis
model
Programming Defines the structur e of the actual
training interv entions (modes and
methods)Structur es the tr aining plan and
provides the modes and
methods used to cr eate the
training pr ogram
Micro-
management
Adapted f rom Haf f (2017); Haf f (2021); Haf f (2024).
When beginning the construction of a periodiz ed training plan the first level, or
periodization level, provides the scaffold from which the training process is
developed (33, 35, 38). At this level, based on the competi tive schedule, the
annual training  plan is subdivided into various periods and phases to provide a
basic framework from which the detailed training plan is establ ished. At the
second level, or planning level, a training model (i.e., parallel, sequential, or
emphasis model) is selected  to guide programmatic decisions. Finally, once the
models of training are select ed and aligned with the various periods and phases
contained within the annual plan, they can be used to inform the third level of the
process, which  involves the actual construction of the training program (41). The
programming level is where the various modes, methods, and targeted training
strategies are implemented and the actual training loads (i.e., intensi ties and
volumes) and training structur es (e.g., loading patterns and set types) are
prescribed (35, 41).
1588
Models of Periodization
While the scienti fic and coaching literature presents numer ous models of
periodization, all models can be classified under three gener al models (figure
22.5).
Parallel Training Models
The parallel train ing models , as shown in figure 22.5, involve targeting all
training factors simultaneously within one training session , training day, series of
training days, or a microcycle (33, 35, 37, 38). Sometimes this approach is
referred to as the concurr ent or complex parallel approach (4). This planning
approach aligns with the early stages of most long-term athlete development
models (61, 62) where youth athletes are exposed to multilateral training
strategies. Additional ly, this approach works well with novice and developmental
athletes (38). A major concern with parallel models is that as the athlete develops
his or her total training load (i.e., volume or load, time dedicated to training, etc.)
must be contin ually increased (35) and may exceed his or her training tolerance
(51). As such, this model may not be the best option when working with
intermediate to elite athletes, who require greater training  variation and stimulus
to continue to stimulate adaptation and elevate performance (16, 35, 37, 38).
With these athletes it may be warranted to implement different planning
strategies (i.e. , emphasis or par allel models) to optimiz e the tr aining pr ocess (38).
Sequential Training Models
Sequential training mode ls, as shown in figure 22.5, were created  to address
the limitations associated with the parallel model of training, such as the inability
to simultaneously develop multiple motor and technical abilities, the need for
longer preparation periods, and the inability to accommodate dense competi tive
schedules (38, 52). These models are used to organize an individual or limited
number of training factors into a logical pattern that guides the athlete toward a
targeted outco me. This approach is ideally suited for athletes who require a
greater training stimulus than what can be provided with the parallel approach
(38).
This approach to organizing training has been successfully implemented with
individual sports such as weightl ifting (97), cross-country skiing (87), cycling (23,
80), track and field (74), and aerobic endur ance sports  (53). Additional ly, this
approach has been successfully implemented with team sports such as American
footbal l (46), basketball (76), footbal l (30), ice hockey (81), and team handbal l
(63).
1589
FIGURE 22.5  Thr ee basic models of planning: par allel, emphasis, and sequential.
Reprinted by permission from G.G. Haff, Scientific Foundations and Practical Applications of Periodization (Human Kinetics, 2025), 111.
Emphasis Training Models
Emphasis training models , as shown in figure 22.5, contain aspects of both
parallel and sequential mode ls of periodization (35, 37, 38). Similar to parallel
models, multiple training factors are targeted simultaneously but with varying
degrees of emphasis over time (38). Over time the degree of focus on the
individual training is shifted in a sequential manner that aligns with the periodiz ed
training plan. Gener ally, when this model is implemented the training emphasis is
rotated every two weeks to optimiz e performance capaci ty (108). When varying
the emphasis some training factors will be undertak en with training loads that
stimulate adaptations, while some training factors are undertak en with training
loads that are used to maintain the athlete’ s current state (38, 108). Additional ly,
some training factors will be targeted with a minimal training dose, which would
result in a degr ee of detr aining.
This training model is ideally suited for intermediate to advanced athletes who
compete in individual or team sports and have congested competi tive schedules
(38). Examples of the use of this model can be seen in several individual sports,
such as track cycling (70), sprinting (27), and mixed martial arts (19). This model
has been also recommende d for team-sport athletes (32) as well as tactical
athletes.
1590
Periodization Hierarchy
Ultimately , periodization is simply a means of organizing the planning of the
training process so that it is partitioned into specific time periods (table 22.2) (36,
37, 41). The multiyear training plan covers the most time but is the least detailed
plan within a periodiz ed training structur e. For example, it may involve the basic
progression of a college soccer player from her freshman to senior year and
contain key developmental goals that are targeted within each year of training.
This multiyear training struct ure is then subdivided into more detailed individual
annual training plans  that are developed based on the athlete’ s progression
through the various stages  or benchmarks forecasted across the multiyear
training plan. In sports that have only one competi tive season, such as American
footbal l, an annual training plan would be represented as a macrocycle .
Howev er, in a sport such as college track and field, the annual plan would be
divided into two macrocycles because of the indoor and outdoor seasons typical
of this college sport. Alternativ ely, if a high school athlete competes in American
footbal l in the fall, basketball in the winter , and track and field in the spring, the
annual plan would be subdivided into three macrocycles. Typical ly, the macrocycle
lasts several months up to a year, depending on the sport or the number of sports
participated in within the year. Within each macrocycle are mesocycles , each
lasting several weeks to months, typical ly two to six weeks, with four weeks being
the most common duration. The number of mesocy cles within each macrocycle
depends on the training targets and the length of the macrocycle within the
annual training plan. Each mesocy cle is then broken down into individual
microcycles that last from several days to weeks; the most common duration is
one week (35, 38). Within each microcycle  are training days that are further
subdivided into tr aining sessions.
Periodization of training begins with general global training targets
set forth in the multiyear or annual training plan and becomes more
specific as the program is developed for the macro-, meso-, and
microcycles. For example, annual training plans set the general
pathway for a training year, while the other cycles provide the
structure that is used to guide the means, methods, and modes
used to create the training program that is used to guide the
athlete’s development toward the primary competitive targets.
TABLE 22.2  Periodization Cycles
Period Duration Description
1591
Period Duration Description
Multiyear tr aining
plans2-4 years This contains interl inked annual tr aining plans; the most common
multiyear plan is the quadr ennial plan.
Annual tr aining
plan1 year The o verall annual tr aining plan can contain a single or mul tiple
macrocycles. It can be subdivided into pr eparatory, competi tive, and
transitional periods of tr aining.
Macrocycle Several months
to a y earIt contains pr eparatory, competi tive, and tr ansitional periods of
training. If i t encompasses one y ear, some authors r efer to this as an
annual plan .
Mesocy cle 2-6 weeks This medium-siz ed training cy cle is sometimes cal led a block of
training . It consists of micr ocycles that ar e linked together . The most
common dur ation is 4 weeks.
Microcycle Several days to 2
weeksThis smal l-sized training cy cle is comprised of mul tiple work outs. It
can range f rom sev eral days to 2 weeks in dur ation; the most
common dur ation is 1 week (7 da ys).
Training da y 1 day One tr aining da y can contain mul tiple sessions. It is designed in the
context of the micr ocycle in which i t is contained.
Training session Several hours It gener ally consists of sev eral hours of tr aining. If the session has
>30 min of r est between bouts of tr aining, i t should be consider ed as
having mul tiple work outs.
Adapted by permission from G.G. Haff and E.E. Haff, “Training Integration and Periodization, ” in NSCA ’s
Guide to Program Design , 2nd ed., edited for the National Strength and Condi tioning Association by M.T.
Jones (Human Kinetics, 2025), 265. Based on Haff (2021); Issurin (2008); V. Issurin,  Building the Modern
Athlete: Scientific Advancement & Training Innovation (Ultimate Athlete Concepts, 2015).; Y. Verkhoshansky
and M.C. Si ff, Supertr aining: Expanded V ersion , 6th ed. (V erkhoshansky , 2009).
1592
Periodization Periods
The overall variation and structur e of the program design variables within each
individual meso- and microcycle are constructed based on the periods included in
the macrocycle or annual training plan (35, 36, 38). Across these periods of the
training plan, the volume and intensi ty of the training and condi tioning program
gener ally receive the greatest attention, but the time spent acquiring and
perfecting sport-speci fic technique must also be considered when one is
constructing the overall periodiz ed training plan (77). Ultimately , periodiz ed
training plans systematical ly shift training foci from general nonspeci fic activities
of high volume and low intensi ty toward activities of lower volume and higher
intensi ties over a period of many weeks or months to help reduce the potential
for overtraining whi le optimizing perf ormance capaci ties.
The basic sequencing of periodiz ed training programs and how training
progresses through the various phases for specified training targets are very
similar to the sequencing and evolution of learning academic concepts. For
example, in academics we start with simple concepts and skills that progress to
more complex concepts; that is, we develop simple skills to provide a sound
foundation for learning more complex items. Ultimately , the periods within a
periodiz ed training plan serve as the pathway for developing foundational
physical, psychological, and performance attributes into more complex sport-
specific tar gets.
In the classic periodization literature, the major divisions of training are
classified as the preparatory, competi tive, and transition periods (34, 66, 89).
Stone, O’Bryant, and Garhammer (89) modified this classic model to include a
“first transition” between the preparatory and competi tive periods of training.
Based on this structur e, some periodization models often contain four distinct but
interr elated training periods: preparatory, first transition, competi tive, and second
transition. Figure 22.6 presents the basic periodization model described by Stone,
O’Bryant, and Garhammer (89). This model is often applied for novice athletes
with a lower training status. Gener ally, in this application, intensi ty begins lower
and gradually increases, while volume starts higher and slowly decreases as the
athlete becom es more condi tioned. It is important to note that not all novice
athletes are able to tolerate large changes in these variables and that smaller
fluctuations may be required (89, 98, 99). It is also important to note that even
though these fluctuations are often represented graphica lly as straight lines, the
volume and intensi ty progressions are in fact nonlinear because of the
fluctuations in the loadings that occur at the micro- and mesocy cle levels (34, 35,
77). This basic misundersta nding of the classic models of periodization has
resulted in these types of models being falsely termed linear periodization models
1593
(35, 51, 77, 93). Ultimately , the term linear periodization  creates a false narrative
because one of the major tenets of periodization is the removal of lineari ty from
the tr aining pr ocess (38, 51, 72, 77 , 93).
FIGURE 22.6  Mat veyev’s model of periodization (appr opriate f or novices).
Adapted by permission from G.G. Haff and E.E. Haff, “Training Integration and Periodization,” in NSCA’s Guide to Program Design, 2nd ed.,
edited for the National Strength and Conditioning Association by M.T. Jones (Human Kinetics, 2024), 268.; M.H. Stone and H.O. O’Bryant,
Weight Training: A Scientific Approach (Burgess, 1987).
Advanced athletes tend to train closer to their abilities and have smaller
adaptation windows. Therefore, these athletes require greater training variation
as well as higher volumes and intensi ties to allow them to continue to experience
appropriate training stimul i (77). For example, Zatsiorsky and colleagues (107)
demonstr ate that a stimulating load for a novice athlete would be a maintenance
load at best for advanced athletes. To address this issue, the shift from higher -
volume to higher -intensi ty training can occur earlier in the preparatory phase,
with higher overall training volumes as compar ed to those in the base model
presented in figure 22.6 .
Preparatory Period
In outlining a periodiz ed training plan, the starting  point is usually the
preparatory period . This period occurs when there are no competi tions, and
technical, tactical, or sport-specific work is limited. This period often corresponds
to what is termed the off-season . The central goal of this period of training is to
develop a base level of condi tioning to increase the athlete’s ability to tolerate
1594
more intense training. Based on the model presented in figure 22.6, the
condi tioning activities would begin with relatively low intensi ties and high
volumes: long, slow distance running or swimming; low-intensi ty plyometrics; and
high-r epetition resistance training with light to moder ate resistances. Traditional ly,
the preparatory period is subdivided into gener al and specific phases. The
general preparatory phase  typically occurs during the early part of the period
and often targets the development of a gener al physical base (38, 69). This early
part of the preparatory period includes high training volumes, low training
intensi ties, and a larger variety of training means that are structur ed to develop
gener al motor abilities and skills (49, 65). The specific  preparatory phase
occurs after the completion of the gener al preparatory phase and involves a shift
in training focus. From the training base that has been establ ished, this phase
expands the athlete’ s training base through an increased emphasis on sport-
specific training  activities that prepare the athlete for the competi tive period (18,
69). During the preparatory period, resistance training phases can be created to
depict more refined differences in training intensi ty and volume. In order, these
are the hypertr ophy (or strength–endur ance) phase and the basic strength phase
(89, 91).
Hypertrophy or Strength–Endurance Phase
The hypertrophy phase , which is also referred to as the strength–endurance
phase , generally occurs during the early portion of the preparatory period (i.e.,
the general preparatory phase) (24, 40, 41, 93). During this phase, the training
intensi ty is low to moder ate, and the overall volume is high. The primary goals
during this phase are to enhance work capaci ty and increase muscle mass. This
development serves as the foundation for the higher-intensi ty training in
subsequent phases and periods (42, 43). With strength or power athletes, the
primary target might be to stimulate hypertr ophic effects while increasing
strength–endur ance. With aerobic endur ance athletes, the primary goal would be
to increase strength–endur ance without significantly increasing hypertr ophy.
Regardless of the sport or athlete being trained, it is gener ally accepted that
during the gener al preparatory phase, sport condi tioning  activities may not be
specific to the athlete’ s sport. Howev er, as the athlete moves into the specific
preparatory phase, over several weeks the training activities will become more
sport specific. For example, sprinters may begin the gener al preparatory phase
with longer -distance runs (longer than their competi tive distance, not traditional
distance running; for example, a 100 m sprinter may do 400 m runs to establ ish a
foundation) at slower speeds  in conjunction with lower -intensi ty plyometrics such
as double-leg bounding and hopping, as well as more basic resistance exercises
that are not necessari ly biomechanical ly or structur ally similar to running (e.g.,
1595
back squat and leg curl). Generally, the athlete performs resistance training with
low to moder ate intensi ties for high v olumes ( table 22.3 ).
TABLE 22.3  A Periodized Model for Resistance Training
Period PreparatoryFirst
transition CompetitionSecond
transition
Phase Gener al preparatory Specific
preparatoryPrecompeti tiveMain competi tive Postcompeti tive
Season Off-season Preseason In-season Postseason
Emphasis Hypertr ophy/strength
endur anceBasic
strengthStrength/power Peaking orMaintenance Active rest
Intensity Low to moder ate High Low to v ery
highVery
high to
very
lowModer ate to
highRecreational
activities (ma y
not in volve
resistance
training)
50%-75% 1RM 80%-95%
1RM87%-95%
1RMa50% to
≥93%
1RM85%-93%
1RM
30%-85% of
1RMb
Volume High Moder ate
to highLow Very
lowLow to
moder ate
3-6 setsc2-6 setsc2-5 setsc 1-3
setsc~2-5 setsc
8-20 r eps 2-6 reps 2-5 reps 1-3
reps3-6 reps
aThese per centages of 1RM apply to nonpower cor e exercises.
bThese percentages of 1RM apply to power exercises. The actual percentage used to elicit power
development depends on the ex ercise that is used. F or mor e information, see K awamori and Haf f (55).
cThese recommenda tions do not include  warm-up sets and represent only target sets for core exercises (40);
they also do not include lower -intensi ty recovery days that are often part of a periodiz ed training plan (40,
89, 92).
Adapted from Haff and Haff (2012); Stone et al. (1981); Stone and O’Bryant (1987); Stone et al. (1982);
Stone et al. (2007).
Howev er, it is important to note that throughout this phase, daily variations in
training intensi ty and workload will facilitate recovery (35, 38). Additional ly,
recovery weeks or microcycles may be placed throughout the phase and most
often at the end of the phase bef ore the next phase of tr aining begins.
The hypertrophy or strength–endurance phase involves low to
moderate intensity (50%-75% of the 1RM) and high volumes (3 to
1596
6 sets of 8-20 repetitions).
Basic Strength Phase
In the later portion of the preparatory period, during the specific preparatory
phase, the primary aim of the basic strength phase  is to increase the strength
of the muscles  that are essential to the primary sport movements (12-14). For
example, the sprinter ’s runnin g program would progress to include interv al sprints
of a moder ate distance and more complex and special ized plyometric drills. The
resistance training program also becomes more specific to the sport (e.g., squat,
power clean, Bulgarian squat) and involves heavier loads performed at lower
volumes than in the hypertr ophy or strength–endur ance phase (table 22.3). As
with the hypertr ophy or strength–endur ance phase, daily variations in training
load f acilitate r ecovery (35, 38).
The basic strength phase involves higher intensity (80%-95% of
the 1RM) and moderate to high volumes (2 to 6 sets of 2 to 6
repetitions).
First Transition Period
As originally described by Stone and colleagues (89-91), the first transition
period  is a link between the preparatory and competi tive period s. Classical ly, the
resistance training in this period focuses on the development of strength and
power as noted in Stone, O’Bryant, and Garhammer ’s (89) seminal paper on the
periodization of strength training. The central aim of this period is to shift the
training focus toward the elevation of strength and its translation into power
development (89, 90). In order to maximiz e this process and facilitate recovery,
variations are observ ed in training intensi ty and workload  at the microcycle level
(35, 38). Additional ly, the last week of the period is marked by reduced volume,
intensi ty, or both to achiev e recovery before the beginning of the competi tive
period.
The main phase within the first transition period is the strength/power
phase . In this phase, for exampl e, the sprinter ’s interv al and speed training
intensi fies to near competi tive pace; speed drills are performed (e.g., sled towing,
sprints against  resistance, and uphill sprints); plyometric drills mimic sprinting;
and the resistance training program involves performing power and explosiv e
exercises at low to very high loads with low volumes. As explained in chapter 18,
the load assignments for power exercises do not follow the typical %RM–
repetition relationship , but their relative intensi ties are elevated during this phase
(table 22.3). Specifically, the exercises selected in this phase can dictate the
loading that is used (55). For example, the development of power may be
1597
facilitated with a load of 80% of the 1RM with power cleans performed from the
hang (55) or floor (17), while a load of 50% to 70% of the 1RM may be used
with the bench  press throw when the aim is to maximiz e power development
(55). Ultimately , to address both strength and power development, a mixed
training approach is warranted in which heavy- and low-load training is used to
optimiz e both at tributes (44).
The strength/power phase involves low to very high loads
(30%-95% of the 1RM, depending on the exercise) and low
volumes (2 to 5 sets for 2 to 5 repetitions).
Competitive Period
The central training target during the competitive period  is preparing the
athlete for competi tion by further increasing strength and power via additional
increases in training intensi ty while decreasing volume. This process can be a
delicate balanc ing act, because adequate volume and intensi ty of training are
needed to maintain competi tive preparedness, and reductions in volume,
intensi ty, or both are needed to optimiz e performanc e. To understand this
conundrum, consider the fitness–f atigue paradigm presented earlier. If training
workloads (volume or intens ity) are reduced too much, fatigue will be reduced,
but there will be a concomi tant decrease in overall fitness that results in a
reduction in competi tive preparedness. Also during this period, time spent
practicing sport-speci fic skills and tactics increases dramatical ly, and a
proportional decrease occurs in time spent performing physical condi tioning
activities such as resistance training. For example, a sprinter places even more
emphasis on speed, reaction  time, sprint -speci fic plyometric drills, and technique
training. The competi tive period may last for one or two weeks for some sports in
which a peaking program is emplo yed (6, 36, 69). Peaking  programs attempt to
place the athlete in peak condi tion for about one or two weeks. Trying to extend
this to longer durations ultimately results in reduced performance capaci ty as a
result of reduction in fitness or potential overtraining (36, 38). Depending on the
load-r eduction strategy emplo yed, peaking programs result in a progressive shift
from higher -intensi ty training toward lower -intensi ty work designed to reduce
fatigue as the athlete moves through the taper before competi tion (36). As shown
in table 22.3 (page 730), resistance training may range between 50% and ≥93%
of the 1RM, depending on wher e athletes ar e in the peaking pr ogram.
For team sports, this period spans an entire season and may last for many
months, requiring the use of a maintenance  program (5). Because of the
prolonged duration of the competi tive period in this situation, the intensi ty and
volume of training must be manipulated on a microcycle basis to maintain
1598
strength and power while managing the fatigue associated with a frequent
competi tion schedule. Gener ally, a maintenance program is marked by moder ate-
to high-intensi ty training (e.g., 85%-93% 1RM) at low to moder ate volumes. At
the microcycle level, the training loads are modulated based on the training,
travel, and competitive sched ule. Careful monitoring of the athlete’ s performance
capaci ty and recovery is critical during the team-spor t athlete’ s competi tive
period.
The competitive period includes peaking and maintenance. For
peaking, athletes use very high to low intensities (50% to ≥93% of
the 1RM) and very low volume (1 to 3 sets of 1 to 3 repetitions) for
one to two weeks. For maintenance, athletes modulate training
between moderate and high intensities (85%-93% of the 1RM)
with moderate volumes (about 2 to 5 sets of 3 to 6 repetitions).
Second Transition Period (Active Rest)
Between the competi tive season and the next annua l training plan or the
preparatory period of a macrocycle, a second trans ition period  is often used to
create a linkage (89). This period is sometimes referred to as an active rest or
restoration  period and gener ally lasts for one to four weeks (38). It is important
to note that if active rest is extended for a prolonged duration, athletes will
require a much longer preparatory period to regain their performance capaci ties
(39). Therefore, it is gener ally recommended that the second transition period
last no longer than four weeks unless an athlete requires additional time to
recover from an injury . Durin g this period, aggressive training immediately after
the peak performance or end of the maintenance phase should be avoided so
athletes can rehabi litate injuries and rest physical ly and mental ly (12-14). For
example, a sprinter may engage in recreational activities such as volleybal l, racket
sports, and swimming in a leisurely manner and perform very low-volume, non–
sport-speci fic resistance training with very low loads. A secondary use of the
active rest concept is to structur e one-week breaks between long phases (three
weeks) or periods of training. The purpose is to create an unloading week to
prepare the body for the subsequent phase or period of training. The practice of
reducing the training load via the reduction of training intensi ty and volume is
believed by many strength and condi tioning professionals to reduce overtraining
potential.
The second transition (active rest) provides a period of time in
which athletes can rehabilitate injuries and refresh both physically
and mentally before beginning a new annual training plan or
1599
macrocycle. This period should not last longer than four weeks,
because long periods with reduced training will require the athlete
to engage in a longer preparatory period to regain sporting form.
1600
Applying Sport Seasons to the Periodization
Periods
In practical terms, periodization involves a logical, systematic variation and
integr ation of training to direct the training responses while managing fatigue and
optimizing performance in accordance with the seasonal demands of the sport
and athletes. Based on the competi tive season, the overall annual plan or
macrocycle is structur ed to sequential ly develop specific attributes required by the
athlete. To avoid monoton y, staleness, and overtraining potential, the training
program must involve structu red variation of key training variables (e.g., volume,
intensi ty, training frequency , training foci, exercise selection) (41). Classical ly,
most intercollegiate and professional sports have an annua l schedule that includes
an off-season, preseason, in-season, and postseason. These seasons are easy to
relate to the periods in a periodiz ed training model ( figure 22.7).
Off-Season
The off-season  should be consider ed the preparatory period; it typical ly lasts from
the end of the postseason to the beginning of the preseas on, which can be about
six weeks before the first major competi tion (although this varies greatly). This
preparatory period is subdivid ed into gener al and specific preparatory phases that
are broken down into mesocy cles; these interlink to prepare the athlete for the
subsequent competi tive season. For example, the athlete may complete several
rotations of mesocy cles that focus on hypertr ophy/strength endur ance and basic
strength (figure 22.7). Ultimately, these cyclical rotations are selected based on
the sport and the athlete’ s needs. For example, if an American footbal l player
needs to gain muscle mass, more mesocy cles that target the hypertr ophy phase
will be pr escribed.
1601
FIGURE 22.7 Relationship of periodization periods to seasons and strength training focus. HP =
hypertr ophy/strength endur ance; BS = basic str ength; AR = activ e rest; SP =str ength/power .
Adapted from G.G. Haff, “The Essentials of Periodisation,” in Strength and Conditioning for Sports Performance, 2nd ed., edited by I. Jeffreys
and J. Moody (Routledge, 2021).
Preseason
After the comp letion of the off-season, the preseason is used to lead into the first
major competi tion. The first transition period is often undertak en at this time with
a focus on the strength/power phase of resistance training. This time is used to
prepare the athlete for the subsequent competi tive period . It is very important to
note that the preseason is not the time to build the foundational physical
capaci ties needed for the sport; this should occur primari ly in the off-season. The
preseason is designed to capitalize on the off-season and elevate the athlete’ s
performance capaci ty during the competi tive period.
In-Season
The competitive, or in-season , period contains all the contests scheduled for the
given year, including any tournament games. Most sports have a long season that
requires multiple mesocy cles arranged around key contests. Thus, a long
competi tive season (12-16+ weeks) presents unique programming challenges—in
these situation s, three- or four-week mesocy cle blocks that unload the athlete in
the last microcycle to allow for fatigue reducti on and performance
super compensation before critical contests (41). This does not mean that the
athlete is in poor condi tion for the other contests, becau se strategical ly varying
where training  days occur in conjunction with altering training intensi ties and
volumes across each microcycle can modulate preparedness and elevate
performance during congested competi tive schedules . Specifically, training
1602
intensi ty and volume are increased or decreased to maintain physical capaci ties
while reducing fatigue and elevating preparedness before the competi tive
engagements. During the in-season, monitoring activities are used to make
strategic decisions about how to vary training loads to more precisely prescribe
training to al ign wi th the athlete’ s curr ent state (11).
Postseason
After the final contest, the postseason or second transition period provides the
athlete with a relative or active rest before the beginning of the next year’s off-
season or preparatory period. It is important to remem ber that the longer the
postseason, the greater the chance for detraining, which results in an increased
need f or a longer gener al preparatory phase during the next of f-season (38).
1603
Undulating Versus Linear Periodization Models
For better or worse, contempor ary periodization literature has adopted the terms
linear and nonlinear when referring  to periodization models. Howev er, it should be
noted that a central tenet of periodization is the removal of lineari ty from training
(35, 38, 45, 51, 65, 72, 88). In fact, when developing his original model of
periodization Matveyev used Yakovlev’s concept of super compensation (104, 105)
as the basis for the need for training to be applied in a nonlinear and rhythmic
manner (59, 103). Matveyev (65) noted that removing lineari ty from the training
process and implementing appropriate training load variations provides a superior
method of tr aining.
Often the traditional resistance training model is falsely referred to as linear
due to the gradual and progressive mesocy cle increases in intensi ty over time (7,
51, 77). Howe ver, a closer look at the traditional model as described by Stone,
O’Bryant, and Garhammer (89, 91) and within the literature (51) shows that the
traditional model contains nonlinear variation in training intensity and volume-load
at the microcycle level and throughout the mesocy cle. Regardless of this, the
nonlinear periodization  model has been introduced in the strength and
condi tioning industry (2, 58, 79). Alternativ ely, this model is sometimes described
as an undulating or daily undulat ing periodization  model because it involves
larger daily (i.e., within the microcycle) fluctuations in the load and volume (e.g.,
repetitions and volume-load) of the assigned core resistan ce training exercise. For
example, when using this programming strategy one might perform 4 sets with a
6RM load (strength focus) on the first day of the week (e.g., Tuesda y), 3 sets with
a 10RM  (hypertrophic focus) on the next training day (e.g., Thursda y), and 5 sets
with a 3RM load (power focus) on the last training day (e.g., Saturday). In this
case the load, volume (e.g., repetitions and volume-load) , and training focus are
all modified within the microcycle. These modifications are in contrast to what
occurs with the traditional periodization  model, falsely referred to as the
linear periodization  model,  according to which the athlete performs the same
number of sets and repetitions across the training days and varies the training
load. For exam ple, the athlete may perform 4 sets of 6 at 85% of the 1RM on the
first day of training, at 75% of the 1RM on the second day, and at 65% of the
1RM on the third day to basically train using a heavy-to-light training structur e
and introduce variation to the training stimulus. While the traditional model
appears to vary only intensi ty because the repetitions do not change, one must
remember that the volume-l oad changes in this model result in undulations in
workload and training volume, supporting the idea that the traditional model is in
fact nonl inear and should not be classi fied as l inear (51, 88).
1604
Some resear ch studies suggest that the daily undula ting model is more
effective than the traditional model (21, 57, 67, 68, 79), although other evidence
suggests that no difference exists between these models (2, 10, 31, 78, 100, 101)
or that traditional models are superior (47, 48, 74, 75, 101). Proponents of the
daily undulatin g model suggest that one of its strengths is the absence of
accumulated neural fatigue caused by extended, ever-increasing training
intensi ties common to the traditional model (56). Conversely, proponents of the
traditional model suggest that the overall high volume-loads of training in the
undulating model result in greater peripher al fatigue and increased risk of injury
because of the high levels of metabol ic fatigue this type of programming can
stimulate (74, 75). Additionally, examination of the stimulus–f atigue–r ecovery–
adaptation theory (figure 22.3) and the fatigue–fi tness paradigm (figure 22.4)
indicates that the daily undulating model has the potential to decrease athlete
preparedness because of accumulated fatigue that occurs with higher volume-
load training sessions. Some authors suggest that, based on the GAS, this
response may actual ly increase the potential for overtraining with higher -level
athletes (35, 94) and result in an increased injury risk for athletes using this
model in conjunction wi th their sport -based tr aining.
1605
Example of an Annual Training Plan
A sample approach to designing a full annual training plan (i.e., macrocycle for
sports with one competi tive season) spanning all four sport seasons is presented
in figure 22.8 .
The annual plan example provided in this chapter defines a macrocycle that
lasts from May 1 until April 28. This macrocycle is subdiv ided into four seasons:
off-season (May 1-August 20), preseason (August 21-No vember 5), in-season
(November 6-April 14), and postseason (begins on April 15). Since there is only
one competi tive season in this annual training plan a single macrocycle structur e
has been used. This macrocycle is then subdivided into 14 mesocy cles, which
range in length between two and four weeks. Note:  The primary focus of this
sample annual training plan is to explain how to subdivide  the annual plan and to
design the resistance training  component. Although other modes of training are
described briefly (e.g., plyometrics, anaer obic condi tioning, aerobic endur ance)
and can be easily incorpor ated into the annual plan, this example is not intended
to illustrate every aspect of a strength and condi tioning program for basketball.
For more information on how to structur e an annual training plan, consul t NSCA ’s
Guide to Pr ogram Design  (41).
Off-Season
Following the postseason active rest period, the athlete should be rested and
ready to begin off-season (preparatory period) training. For this example, this
preparatory period lasts about 16 weeks, from May 1 until August 20. The goal of
this period is to establ ish a base level of condi tioning to increase the athlete’ s
tolerance for more intense training in later phases and periods. In this example,
mesocy cle 1 is used to expose the athlete to initial strength and condi tioning
activities at low intensi ties and volumes to reintroduce them to training. Across
the first two microcycles training intensi ty increases in preparation for
performance testing that is planned for microcycle 3. During these first three
weeks training loads are applied based on the athlete’ s rating of perceived
exertion or based on of the repetition-in-r eserv e scale presented in chapter 18.
During microcycle 3 the training loads for all non-tested activities will be reduced
so that the athletes can partake in a series of initial pretesting to establ ish the
initial training loads for the exercises in the second mesocy cle. In later
mesocy cles, when more or other exercises are added, the training loads can be
estimated from loads used in similar exercises or can be determined from RM
testing. For example, the strength and condi tioning professional can reasonably
predict training  load for the hang clean from the tested power clean maximum, or
the actual RM load could be measur ed. Other monitoring tests related to
1606
basketball are shoulder and hip flexibi lity tests, 30-15 intermittent fitness test,
300-yard (274 m) shuttle, line drill, T-test, vertical jump, isometric mid-thigh pull,
and skinf old measur ements (see chapter 14  for testing pr otocols).
The resistance training comp onent holds higher priority in the off-season, and
an athlete may follow a split routine of four or more training days per week. In
this example, the basketball player begins the off-season with a total body, three-
times-per -week regimen but soon progresses to four training days per week with
variations in training intens ity across the microcycle to allow fatigue to be
managed. These advancements also involve a gradual increase in loading, with
associated decreases in training volume as the athlete shifts his or her training
focus toward maximizing strength development. Other training includes sprint and
agility training  as well as plyometrics and metabol ic condi tioning. These
condi tioning workouts are scheduled on nonresistance training days, and flexibi lity
training should be emphasiz ed in the warm-up and cool-down portions of each
training session.
FIGURE 22.8  Sample annual plan f or a f emale bask etball athlete.
Preseason
After undertaking one or two unloading weeks following the cessation of the off-
season training period, the athlete begins the preseason  period of training. For
this example, the period covers 11 weeks (August 21-October 5). The goals of the
preseason are to increase the intensi ty of sport-speci fic training and the attention
given to basketball drills and skills. The resistance training portion is planned for
three days per week and focuses primari ly on strength and power outcomes.
Other training modes (e.g., plyometrics and anaer obic condi tioning) hold high
priority, especial ly if they dir ectly contribute to bask etball training.
1607
In-Season
After an unloading week following the preseason, the athlete is ready to begin the
competi tive period of training. The in-season period lasts approximately 22
weeks, spanning a time period from November until April (including a four-week
tournament period, although it could last longer). The goals for the in-season are
to maintain and possibly improve strength, power , flexibility, and anaer obic
condi tioning. The time constr aints of games, skill and strategy practice, and travel
result in a lower volume of off-court training activities. Due to multiple games
each week, resistance training may be limited to 30 minutes, one to three times
per week, consisting of an undulating regimen of varying volume-loads and
relative intensi ties. Power and basketball-speci fic nonpower core exercises
predominate, with assistance exercises added for balan ce. See the sample in-
season program near the end of this chapter . Plyometric sessions should be
alternated with resistance training and conducted once or twice weekly ,
depending on the number of games.
On days when no resistance training is scheduled, 15 to 20 minutes of various
short sprint interv als could be performed once or twice weekly during practice.
Speed, agility, and other running condi tioning can be incorpor ated into practice
time, and flexibility training can be part of the practice and game warm-up and
cool-down. Two or three days of rest should be afforded between resistance
training, plyometrics, and sprint interv al sessions, depending on the game
schedule. This period is similar to the previous training period in that the majori ty
of the athlete’ s time is spent on skill and strategy development, with the
remainder dev oted to condi tioning.
The athlete is in good condi tion from the previous mesoc ycles, so she should
be able not only to maintain that condi tion but also to peak again if the team
continues in the conference tournament. If the tournament game schedule does
not allow for more than one resistance training session per week, the athlete
should perform all the week’ s power and core exercises (if time allows) and omit
the assistance exercises. Two examples of specific weekly tournament schedules
are presented near the end of this chapter .
Postseason (Active Rest Period)
Following the completion of the competi tive season is a (second) transition period
of active rest with no formal or structur ed workouts. For this example, the
transition period lasts a month (April 15-Ma y 12). The goal of the period is for the
athlete to recuper ate physical ly and psychological ly from the long in-season.
Recreational games and fitness activities include swimming, jogging, circuit
weight training, volleybal l, racquetbal l, and informal basketball. All activities are
performed at low intensi ties wi th low v olumes.
1608
Reviewing the Annua l Plan Example
For any periodization mode l to function optimal ly, the sport coach and the
strength and condi tioning professional must plan the program together to share
goals and strategies. This is a critical issue in that working together allows all the
training factors that the athlete will engage in to be integr ated so as to better
manage the training stress and modulate fatigue and recovery. Without the
cooper ation of all involved professionals, optimal performance cannot be fully
achiev ed.
The example in this chapter is a representation of only one periodization model
that could be used to struct ure training for a sample athlete. Other athletes or
sports may require subtle to radical variations in the structur e presented here. It
is important to remember that a multitude of period ization models can be
adapted to meet the needs of the v arious athletes and sports.
1609
Conclusion
Periodization is a process through which the athlete’ s training is logical ly and
systematical ly organized to optimiz e preparedness and increase performance
potential for the most impor tant competi tions. The annua l training plan (year of
training) is divided into macrocycles that contain preparatory, competi tive, and
transition periods. Each period is subdivided into mesocy cles that target specific
phases of development: hypertrophy/strength endur ance, basic strength, or
strength/power . Transitions are used to link mesocy cles or macrocycles and
provide the athlete with an unloading period that enhances recovery. The overall
structur e of the macrocycle, mesocy cle, and individual microcycles is dictated by
the individual sport ’s competi tive season and demands.
Off-Season
Female Col lege B asketball Center
16 weeks: Ma y 1-August 20
Mesocycle 1
May 1-Ma y 14
Focus: B asic str ength
Microcycles 1-2 (2 weeks)
Day ExerciseWeek 1 Week 2
Sets Reps Intensity Sets Reps Intensity
Mon/Fri Power clean 2 3/1a 5-6 RPE
(4-5 RIR)3 3/1a 7-7.5 RPE
(2-3 RIR)
Back squat 2 5 5-6 RPE
(4-5 RIR)3 5 7-7.5 RPE
(2-3 RIR)
Bench pr ess 2 5 5-6 RPE
(4-5 RIR)3 5 7-7.5 RPE
(2-3 RIR)
Single-leg squat 2 8/8b 5-6 RPE
(4-5 RIR)3 8/8b 7-7.5 RPE
(2-3 RIR)
Lying triceps extension 2 8 5-6 RPE
(4-5 RIR)3 8 7-7.5 RPE
(2-3 RIR)
Glute ham r aise 2 10 5-6 RPE 3 10 7-7.5 RPE
a3/1 represents a cluster set wi th a 20-second r est between each r ep.
b8/8 = 8 r eps per side.
1610
Microcycles 1-2 (2 weeks)
(4-5 RIR) (2-3 RIR)
Abdominal crunch 2 20 3 20
Wed Hang power clean 2 3 5-6 RPE
(4-5 RIR)3 3 7-7.5 RPE
(2-3 RIR)
Clean pul l (floor) 2 5 5-6 RPE
(4-5 RIR)3 10 7-7.5 RPE
(2-3 RIR)
Clean grip R omanian deadl ift 2 5 5-6 RPE
(4-5 RIR)3 10 7-7.5 RPE
(2-3 RIR)
Lat pul ldown 2 5 5-6 RPE
(4-5 RIR)3 10 7-7.5 RPE
(2-3 RIR)
Biceps curl 2 5 5-6 RPE
(4-5 RIR)3 10 7-7.5 RPE
(2-3 RIR)
Abdominal crunch 2 20 3 20
a3/1 represents a cluster set wi th a 20-second r est between each r ep.
b8/8 = 8 r eps per side.
Mesocycle 1
May 15-Ma y 21
Focus: I nitial pr etesting
Microcycle 3 (1 week)
5RM power exercises Power clean
Power snatch
10RM for assistance exercises Lat pul ldown
Biceps curl
Lying triceps extension
Upright r ow
5RM for nonpower core exercises Back squat
Bench pr ess
Other testing Sit and r each
Shoulder elev ation
30-15 intermi ttent fi tness test
Line dri ll
T-test
Vertical jump
Isometric mid-thigh pul l test
Body composi tion (skinf olds)
Mesocycle 2
1611
May 22-June 18
Focus: Hypertr ophy
Microcycles 4-6 (3 weeks)
Session Exercises Sets Reps Week 4 Week 5 Week 6
Mon/Fri Back squat 3 10 80%-84% 10RM 85%-89% 10RM 90%-94%
10RM
Incline bench pr ess 3 10 80%-84% 10RM 85%-89% 10RM 90%-94%
10RM
Single-leg squat 3 10/10a 80%-84% 10RM 85%-89% 10RM 90%-94%
10RM
Three-way shoulder 3 10/10/10b80%-84% 10RM 85%-89% 10RM 90%-94%
10RM
Glute ham r aise 3 10 Add load i f possible
Abdominal ex ercisec3 25
Note:  Friday session should use a load 10% less than Monda y’s.
Wed Hang power clean 3 10 75%-89% 10RM 80%-84% 10RM 85%-89%
10RM
Clean grip deadl ift 3 10 75%-89% 10RM 80%-84% 10RM 85%-89%
10RM
Clean grip RDL 3 10 75%-89% 10RM 80%-84% 10RM 85%-89%
10RM
Lat pul ldown 3 10 75%-89% 10RM 80%-84% 10RM 85%-89%
10RM
Abdominal ex ercisec3 25
Microcycle 7 (1 week)
Session Exercises Sets Reps Week 7
Mon/Fri Back squat 3 10 70%-74% 10RM
Incline bench pr ess 3 10 70%-74% 10RM
Single-leg squat 3 10/10a 70%-74% 10RM
Abdominal ex ercisec3 20
Note:  Friday session should use a load 10% less than Monda y’s.
Wed Hang power clean 3 10 70%-74% 10RM
a10/10 = 10 per leg.
b10/10/10 = 10 f ront raise, 10 side later al raise, 10 r everse fly .
cAbdominal exercise of choice: sit-up, GHD sit-up, toes to bar, reverse crunch, crunch,
Russian twist.
1612
Microcycles 4-6 (3 weeks)
Clean grip deadl ift 3 10 70%-74% 10RM
Clean grip RDL 3 10 70%-74% 10RM
Abdominal ex ercisec3 20
a10/10 = 10 per leg.
b10/10/10 = 10 f ront raise, 10 side later al raise, 10 r everse fly .
cAbdominal exercise of choice: sit-up, GHD sit-up, toes to bar, reverse crunch, crunch,
Russian twist.
Mesocycle 3
June 19- July 16
Focus: B asic str ength
Microcycles 8-10 (3 weeks)
Session Exercises Sets Reps Week 8 Week 9 Week 10
Mon/Fri Power clean 3 5 80%-84% 5RM 85%-89% 5RM 90%-94% 5RM
Back squat 3 5 80%-84% 5RM 85%-89% 5RM 90%-94% 5RM
Bench pr ess 3 5 80%-84% 5RM 85%-89% 5RM 90%-94% 5RM
Lying triceps extension 2 10 75%-79% 10RM 80%-84% 10RM 85%-89% 10RM
Upright r ow 2 10 75%-79%10RM 80%-84% 10RM 85%-89% 10RM
Abdominal ex ercise* 3 20
Note:  Friday session should use a load 10% less than Monda y’s.
Wed Snatch grip deadl ift 3 5 75%-79% 5RM 80%-84% 5RM 85%-89% 5RM
Snatch grip mid-thigh pul l3 5 75%-79% 5RM 80%-84% 5RM 85%-89% 5RM
Lat pul ldown 2 10 70%-74% 10RM 75%-79% 10RM 80%-84% 10RM
Hammer curl 2 10 70%-74% 10RM 75%-79%10RM 80%-84% 10RM
Glute ham r aise 3 10 Add weight i f possible
Abdominal ex ercise* 3 20
Microcycle 11 (1 week)
Session Exercises Sets Reps Week 11
Mon/Fri Power clean 3 5 70%-74% 5RM
Back squat 3 5 70%-74% 5RM
Bench pr ess 3 5 70%-74% 5RM
*Abdominal ex ercise of choice: si t-up, GHD si t-up, toes to bar , reverse crunch, crunch, R ussian twist.
1613
Microcycles 8-10 (3 weeks)
Abdominal ex ercise* 3 20
Note:  Friday session should use a load 10% less than Monda y’s.
Wed Snatch grip deadl ift 3 5 70%-74% 5RM
Snatch grip mid-thigh pul l3 5 70%-74% 5RM
Lat pul ldown 2 10 60%-69% 5RM
Abdominal ex ercise* 3 20
*Abdominal ex ercise of choice: si t-up, GHD si t-up, toes to bar , reverse crunch, crunch, R ussian twist.
Mesocycle 4
July 17- August 13
Focus: B asic str ength
Microcycles 12-13 (2 weeks)
Session Exercises Sets Reps Week 12 Week 13
Mon/Fri Hang power snatch 5 5 75%-79% 5RM 80%-84% 5RM
Back squat 5 5 75%-79% 5RM 80%-84% 5RM
Strict pr ess 5 5 75%-79% 5RM 80%-84% 5RM
Leg (knee) curl 3 12 70%-74% 12RM 75%-79% 12RM
Seated cal f raise 3 12 70%-74% 12RM 75%-79% 12RM
Abdominal ex ercise* 3 20
Note:  Friday session should use a load 10% less than Monda y’s.
Wed Hang power clean 5 5 70%-74% 5RM 75%-79% 5RM
Clean pul l (floor) 5 5 70%-74% 5RM 75%-79% 5RM
Bent-over row 5 5 70%-74% 5RM 75%-79% 5RM
Barbell biceps curl 3 12 65%-69% 12RM 70%-74% 12 RM
Triceps pushdown 3 12 65%-69% 12RM 70%-74% 12 RM
Abdominal ex ercise* 3 25
Microcycles 14-15 (2 weeks)
Session Exercises Sets Reps Week 14 Week 15
Mon/Fri Hang power snatch 3 5 85%-89% 5RM 90%-94% 5RM
Back squat 3 5 85%-89% 5RM 90%-94% 5RM
*Abdominal ex ercise of choice: si t-up, GHD si t-up, toes to bar , reverse crunch, crunch, R ussian twist.
1614
Microcycles 12-13 (2 weeks)
Strict pr ess 3 5 85%-89% 5RM 90%-94% 5RM
Leg (knee) curl 3 8 75%-79% 8RM 80%-84% 8RM
Seated cal f raise 3 8 75%-79% 8RM 80%-84% 8RM
Abdominal ex ercise* 3 20
Note:  Friday session should use a load 10% less than Monda y’s.
Wed Hang power clean 3 5 80%-84% 5RM 85%-89% 5RM
Clean pul l (floor) 3 5 80%-84% 5RM 85%-89% 5RM
Bent-over row 3 5 80%-84% 5RM 85%-89% 5RM
Barbell biceps curl 3 8 70%-74% 8RM 75%-79% 8RM
Triceps pushdown 3 8 70%-74% 8RM 75%-79% 8RM
Abdominal ex ercise* 3 20
*Abdominal ex ercise of choice: si t-up, GHD si t-up, toes to bar , reverse crunch, crunch, R ussian twist.
Mesocycle 4
August 14- August 20
Focus: I nitial pr etesting
Microcycle 16 (1 week)
3RM power exercises Power clean
Power snatch
8RM for assistance exercises Lat pul ldown
Biceps curl
Lying triceps extension
Upright r ow
3RM for nonpower core exercises Back squat
Bench pr ess
Other testing Sit and r each
Shoulder elev ation
30-15 intermi ttent fi tness test
Line dri ll
T-test
Vertical jump
Isometric mid-thigh pul l test
Body composi tion (skinf olds)
Preseason
1615
Female Col lege B asketball Center
11 weeks: A ugust 21-No vember 5
Mesocycle 5
August 21- September 17
Focus: Str ength/power 1
Microcycle 17 (1 week)
Session Exercises Sets Reps Week 17
Mon/Fri Push jerk 5 5 75%-79% 5RM
Back squat 5 5 80%-84% 5RM
Incline bench pr ess 5 5 80%-84% 5RM
Biceps curl 3 10 75%-79% 10RM
Dip 3 10 Add weight i f possible
Abdominal ex ercisea 3 20
Note:  Friday session should use a load 15% less than Monda y’s.
Wed Power clean 5 5/1b80%-84% 1RM
Clean pul l (floor) 5 5 80%-84% 5RM
Romanian deadl ift 5 5 75%-79% 5RM
Pendla y row 3 10 75%-79% 10RM
Pull-up 3 10 Add weight i f possible (use band i f needed)
Abdominal ex ercisea 3 20
Microcycles 18-19 (2 weeks)
Session Exercises Sets Reps Week 18 Week 19
Mon Push jerk 3 5 80%-84% 5RM 85%-89% 5RM
Back squat 3 5 85%-89% 5RM 90%-94% 5RM
Incline bench pr ess 3 5 85%-89% 5RM 90%-94% 5RM
Biceps curl 3 8 80%-84% 8RM
Dip 3 10 Add weight i f possible
Abdominal ex ercisea 3 20
Wed Power clean 3 5/1b80%-84% 1RM 85%-89% 1RM
Clean pul l (floor) 3 5 85%-89% 5RM 90%-94% 5RM
aAbdominal ex ercise of choice: si t-up, GHD si t-up, toes to bar , reverse crunch, or crunch.
bCluster set wi th 20 s between r eps.
1616
Microcycle 17 (1 week)
Romanian deadl ift 3 8 85%-89% 5RM 90%-94% 5RM
Pendla y row 3 10 80%-84% 10RM 85%-89% 10RM
Pull-up 3 10 Add weight i f possible (use band i f needed)
Abdominal ex ercisea 3 20
Fri Push jerk 3 5 75%-79% 5RM 80%-84% 5RM
Quarter back squat (f rom pins) 3 5 80%-84% 5RM 85%-89% 5RM
Closed-grip bench pr ess 3 5 75%-79% 5RM 80%-84% 5RM
Hammer curl 3 8 75%-79% 8RM 80%-84% 8RM
Triceps pushdown 3 8 75%-79% 8RM 80%-84% 8RM
Abdominal ex ercisea 3 20
Microcycle 20 (1 week)
Session Exercises Sets Reps Week 20
Mon/Fri Push jerk 3 3 75%-79% 3RM
Back squat 3 3 75%-79% 3RM
Incline bench pr ess 3 3 75%-79% 3RM
Biceps curl 3 8 70%-74% 8RM
Lying triceps extension 3 8 70%-74% 8RM
Abdominal ex ercisea 3 20
Note:  Friday session should use a load 10% less than Monda y’s.
Wed Power clean 3 3/1b75%-79% 1RM
Clean pul l (floor) 3 3 75%-79% 3RM
Romanian deadl ift 3 3 75%-79% 3RM
Pendla y row 3 5 75%-79% 5RM
Pull-up 3 8 Add weight i f possible (use band i f needed)
Abdominal ex ercisea 3 20
aAbdominal ex ercise of choice: si t-up, GHD si t-up, toes to bar , reverse crunch, or crunch.
bCluster set wi th 20 s between r eps.
Mesocycle 6
September 18-October 15
Focus: Str ength/power 2
1617
Microcycle 21 (1 week)
Session Exercises Sets Reps Week 21
Mon Hang power clean 5 3 80%-84% 3RM
Front squat 3 5 85%-89% 5RM
Clean pul l (thigh block) 3 5 80%-84% 5RM
Push pr ess 3 5 75%-79% 5RM
Dip 3 8 Add weight i f possible
Abdominal ex ercisea 3 20
Wed Overhead squat 5 3 75%-79% 3RM
Hang power snatch 5 3 75%-79% 3RM
Snatch pul l (floor) 3 5 85%-89% 5RM
Snatch grip R omanian deadl ift 3 5 85%-89% 5RM
Pull-up 3 10 Add weight i f possible (use band i f needed)
Abdominal ex ercisea 3 20
Fri Push jerk 5 3 70%-74% 3RM
Jump squatb 5 3 45%-49% 1RM
Quarter f ront squat 3 5 80%-84% 5RM
Closed-grip bench pr ess 3 5 75%-79% 5RM
Glute ham r aise 3 10 Add weight i f possible
Abdominal ex ercisea 3 20
Microcycles 22-23 (2 weeks)
Session Exercises Sets Reps Week 22 Week 23
Mon Push jerk 4 3 85%-89% 3RM 90%-94% 3RM
Hang power clean 4 3 80%-84% 3RM 85%-89% 3RM
Front squat 5 3 90%-94% 3RM 80%-84% 3RM
Clean pul l (floor) 5 3 80%-84% 3RM 85%-89% 3RM
Dip 3 8 Add weight i f possible
Abdominal ex ercisea 3 20
Wed Snatch grip jump shrugc 4 3 45%-49% 1RM 50%-54% 1RM
Hang power snatch 4 3 70%-74% 3RM 75%-79% 3RM
aAbdominal ex ercise of choice: si t-up, GHD si t-up, toes to bar , reverse crunch, or crunch.
bLoad based of f back squat 1RM.
cLoad based of f power snatch 1RM.
1618
Microcycle 21 (1 week)
Snatch pul l (thigh block) 5 3 85%-89% 3RM 90%-94% 3RM
Snatch grip R omanian deadl ift 5 3 80%-84% 3RM 85%-89% 3RM
Pull-up 3 10 Add weight i f possible (use band i f needed)
Abdominal ex ercisea 3 20
Fri Push jerk 4 3 70%-74% 3RM 75%-79% 3RM
Jump squatb 4 3 45%-49% 1RM 50%-54% 1RM
Quarter f ront squat 5 3 80%-84% 5RM 85%-89% 5RM
Closed-grip bench pr ess 5 3 75%-79% 5RM 80%-84% 5RM
Glute ham r aise 3 10 Add weight i f possible
Abdominal ex ercisea 3 20
Microcycle 24 (1 week)
Session Exercises Sets Reps Week 24
Mon Hang power clean 3 2 70%-74% 2RM
Front squat 3 3 75%-79% 3RM
Clean pul l (thigh block) 3 3 80%-84% 3RM
Push pr ess 3 3 75%-79% 3RM
Dip 3 8 Add weight i f possible
Abdominal ex ercisea 3 20
Wed Snatch grip jump shrugc 3 2 50%-54% 1RM
Hang power snatch 3 2 70%-74% 2RM
Snatch pul l (thigh block) 3 3 80%-84% 3RM
Snatch grip R omanian deadl ift 3 3 75%-79% 3RM
Pull-up 3 8 Add weight i f possible (use band i f needed)
Abdominal ex ercisea 3 20
Fri Push jerk 3 2 70%-74% 2RM
Jump squatb 3 2 50%-54% 1RM
Quarter f ront squat 3 3 80%-84% 3RM
Closed-grip bench pr ess 3 3 80%-84% 3RM
Glute ham r aise 3 8 Add weight i f possible
aAbdominal ex ercise of choice: si t-up, GHD si t-up, toes to bar , reverse crunch, or crunch.
bLoad based of f back squat 1RM.
cLoad based of f power snatch 1RM.
1619
Microcycle 21 (1 week)
Abdominal ex ercisea 3 20
aAbdominal ex ercise of choice: si t-up, GHD si t-up, toes to bar , reverse crunch, or crunch.
bLoad based of f back squat 1RM.
cLoad based of f power snatch 1RM.
Mesocycle 7
October 16-October 29
Focus: Str ength/power 3
Microcycle 25 (1 week)
Session Exercises Sets Reps Week 25
Mon/Fri Hang power clean 3 5 70-%74% 5RM
Back squat + bo x jump 3 5+5 80%-84% 5RM
Bench pr ess + medicine bal l chest pass 3 5+5 80%-84% 5RM
Push jerk 3 5 70%-75% 5RM
Lying triceps extension 3 8 75%-79% 8RM
Abdominal ex ercise* 3 20
Note:  Friday session should use a load 10% less than Monda y’s.
Wed Hang power snatch 3 5 70%-75% 5RM
Snatch pul l (floor) 3 5 80%-84% 5RM
Lat pul ldown 3 8 75%-79% 8RM
Bent-over row 3 8 75%-79% 8RM
Glute ham r aise 3 10 Add weight i f possible
Abdominal ex ercise* 3 20
Microcycle 26 (1 week)
Session Exercises Sets Reps Week 26
Mon/Fri Hang power clean 4 3 75%-79% 3RM
Back squat + bo x jump 4 3+3 85%-89% 3RM
Bench pr ess + medicine bal l chest pass 4 3+3 80%-84% 3RM
Push jerk 4 3 80%-84% 3RM
Lying triceps extension 3 8 80%-84% 3RM
Abdominal ex ercise* 3 20
*Abdominal ex ercise of choice: si t-up, GHD si t-up, toes to bar , reverse crunch, or crunch.
1620
Microcycle 25 (1 week)
Note:  Friday session should use a load 10% less than Monda y’s.
Wed Hang power snatch 4 3 75%-79% 3RM
Snatch pul l (floor) 4 3 85%-89% 3RM
Lat pul ldown 3 8 80%-84% 8RM
Bent-over row 3 8 80%-84% 8RM
Glute ham r aise 3 10 Add weight i f possible
Abdominal ex ercise* 3 20
*Abdominal ex ercise of choice: si t-up, GHD si t-up, toes to bar , reverse crunch, or crunch.
Mesocycle 7
October 30-No vember 5
Focus: P ost pr eseason testing (bef ore in-season)
Microcycle 27 (1 Week)
2RM power exercise Power clean
Hang power snatch
Push jerk
Push pr ess
2RM for nonpower core exercises Back squat
Front squat
Bench pr ess
Other testing* Sit and r each
Shoulder elev ation
30-15 intermi ttent fi tness test
Line dri ll
T-test
Vertical jump
Isometric mid-thigh pul l test
Body composi tion (skinf olds)
*Other ex ercises to test based on in-season pr ogram.
In-Season
Female Col lege B asketball Center
23 weeks: No vember 6- April 14 (including tournament pla y)
Mesocycle 8
1621
November 6-December 3
Focus: Str ength maintenance
Microcycles 28-31 (4 Weeks)
Session Exercises Sets RepsTraining loads
Week 28 Week 29 Week 30 Week 31
1 Clean pul l (mid-thigh
block)1 4 75%-79%
1RM80%-84%
1RM60%-64%
1RM85%-89%
1RM
Back squat 1 6 75%-79%
6RM80%-84%
6RM65%-69%
6RM90%-94%
6RM
Incline bench pr ess 1 6 75%-79%
6RM80%-84%
6RM65%-69%
6RM90%-94%
6RM
Lateral shoulder r aise 1 10 70%-74%
10RM75%-79%
10RM70%-74%
10RM80%-84%
10RM
Abdominal ex ercise* Max in 60 s
2 Push pr ess 1 6 70%-74%
6RM75%-79%
6RM60%-64%
6RM80%-84%
6RM
Quarter f ront squat
(from pins)1 6 70%-74%
6RM75%-79%
6RM60%-64%
6RM80%-84%
6RM
Closed-grip bench
press1 6 70%-74%
6RM75%-79%
6RM60%-64%
6RM80%-84%
6RM
Seated low pul ley row1 6 70%-74%
6RM75%-79%
6RM60%-64%
6RM80%-84%
6RM
Abdominal ex ercise* Max in 60 s
*Abdominal ex ercise of choice: si t-up, GHD si t-up, toes to bar , reverse crunch, or crunch.
Mesocycle 9
December 4-December 31
Focus: Str ength and power dev elopment
Microcycles 32-35 (4 Weeks)
Session Exercises Sets RepsTraining loads
Week 32 Week 33 Week 34 Week 35
1 Hang power clean 1 3 65%-69%
1RM70%-74%
1RM60%-64%
1RM80%-84%
1RM
*Abdominal ex ercise of choice: si t-up, GHD si t-up, toes to bar , reverse crunch, or crunch.
1622
Microcycles 32-35 (4 Weeks)
Front squat 1 5 70%-74%
5RM80% 5RM 60%-64%
5RM80%-84%
5RM
Standing shoulder
press1 5 70%-74%
5RM80% 5RM 60%-64%
5RM80%-84%
5RM
Lying triceps
extension1 10 70%-74%
10RM80% 10RM 65%-69%
10RM80%-84%
10RM
Abdominal
exercise*Max in 60 s
2 Push jerk 1 3 60%-64%
1RM65%-69%
1RM60% 1RM 70%-74%
1RM
Step-up 1 5 65%-69%
5RM70%-74%
5RM60% 5RM 75%-79%
5RM
Closed-grip bench
press1 10 60%-64%
10RM65%-69%
10RM60% 10RM 70%-74%
10RM
Lat pul ldown 1 10 60%-64%
10RM65%-69%
10RM60% 10RM 70%-74%
10RM
Abdominal
exercise*Max in 60 s
*Abdominal ex ercise of choice: si t-up, GHD si t-up, toes to bar , reverse crunch, or crunch.
Mesocycle 10
January 1- January 28
Focus: Str ength and power dev elopment
Microcycles 36-39 (4 Weeks)
Session Exercises Sets RepsTraining loads
Week 36 Week 37 Week 38 Week 39
1 Power clean 1 2 80%-84%
1RM85%-89%
1RM90%-94%
1RM70%-74%
1RM
Back squat 1 4 80%-84%
4RM85%-89%
4RM90%-94%
4RM65%-69%
4RM
Bench pr ess 1 4 80%-84%
4RM85%-89%
4RM90%-94%
4RM65%-69%
4RM
Barbell biceps curl 1 8 80%-84%
8RM85%-89%
8RM90%-94%
8RM65%-69%
8RM
Abdominal ex ercise* Max in 60 s
*Abdominal ex ercise of choice: si t-up, GHD si t-up, toes to bar , reverse crunch, or crunch.
1623
Microcycles 36-39 (4 Weeks)
2 Hang power snatch 1 3 70%-74%
1RM75%-78%
1RM80%-84%
1RM60%-64%
1RM
Forward step lunge 1 4 70%-74%
4RM75%-78%
4RM80%-84%
4RM60%-64%
4RM
Closed-grip bench
press1 8 70%-74%
8RM75%-78%
8RM80%-84%
8RM60%-64%
8RM
Upright r ow 1 8 70%-74%
8RM75%-78%
8RM80%-84%
8RM60%-64%
8RM
Abdominal ex ercise* Max in 60 s
*Abdominal ex ercise of choice: si t-up, GHD si t-up, toes to bar , reverse crunch, or crunch.
Mesocycle 11
January 29-F ebruary 15
Focus: Str ength and power dev elopment
Microcycles 40-43 (4 Weeks)
Session Exercises Sets RepsTraining loads
Week 40 Week 41 Week 42 Week 43
1 Snatch grip mid-thigh
pull (block)1 6 75%-79%
1RM80%-84%
1RM60%-64%
1RM85%-89%
1RM
Back squat 1 6 80%-84%
6RM85%-89%
6RM65%-69%
6RM90%-94%
6RM
Bench pr ess 1 6 80%-84%
6RM85%-89%
6RM65%-69%
6RM90%-94%
6RM
Lateral shoulder r aise 1 10 75%-79%
10RM80%-84%
10RM70%-74%
10RM85%-89%
10RM
Abdominal ex ercise* Max in 60 s
2 Push pr ess 1 6 70%-74%
6RM75%-79%
6RM60%-64%
6RM80%-84%
6RM
Quarter back squat
(from pins)1 6 70%-74%
6RM75%-79%
6RM60%-64%
6RM80%-84%
6RM
Closed-grip bench
press1 6 70%-74%
6RM75%-79%
6RM60%-64%
6RM80%-84%
6RM
Seated low pul ley row 1 6 70%-74%
6RM75%-79%
6RM60%-64%
6RM80%-84%
6RM
Abdominal ex ercise* Max in 60 s
*Abdominal ex ercise of choice: si t-up, GHD si t-up, toes to bar , reverse crunch, or crunch.
1624
Mesocycle 12
February 16-Mar ch 17
Focus: P ower and str ength optimization
Microcycles 44-46 (3 Weeks—SEC Tournament)
Session Exercises Sets RepsTraining loads
Week 44 Week 45 Week 46
1 Hang power clean 1 3 70%-74% 1RM 75%-79% 1RM 80%-84% 1RM
Front squat 1 5 75%-79% 5RM 80%-84% 5RM 85%-89% 5RM
Push pr ess 1 5 75%-79% 5RM 80%-84% 5RM 85%-89% 5RM
Lying triceps extension 1 10 75%-79% 10RM 80%-84% 10RM 85%-89% 10RM
Abdominal ex ercisea Max in 60 s
2 Push jerk 1 3 65%-69% 1RM 70%-74% 1RM 75%-79% 1RM
Jump squatb 1 5 70%-74% 5RM 75%-79% 5RM 80%-84% 5RM
Closed-grip bench pr ess 1 10 65%-69% 10RM 70%-74% 10RM 75%-79% 10RM
Lat pul ldown 1 10 65%-69% 10RM 70%-74% 10RM 75%-79% 10RM
Abdominal ex ercisea Max in 60 s
aAbdominal ex ercise of choice: si t-up, GHD si t-up, toes to bar , reverse crunch, or crunch.
bIntensi ty based of f of 1RM squat.
Mesocycle 13
March 18- April 7
Focus: P ower and peaking perf ormance
Microcycles 47-49 (3 Weeks—national tournament)
Session Exercises Sets RepsTraining loads
Week 47 Week 48 Week 49
1 Jump squatb 1 3 40%-44% 1RM 35%-39% 1RM 30%-34% 1RM
Quarter back squat 1 3 80%-84% 3RM 75%-79% 3RM 70%-74% 3RM
Push jerk 1 3 80%-84% 3RM 75%-79% 3RM 70%-74% 3RM
Lying triceps extension 1 8 80%-84% 8RM 75%-79% 8RM 70%-74% 8RM
aAbdominal ex ercise of choice: si t-up, GHD si t-up, toes to bar , reverse crunch, or crunch.
bIntensi ty based of f 1RM bench pr ess.
1625
Microcycles 47-49 (3 Weeks—national tournament)
Abdominal ex ercisea Max in 60 s
2 Jump shrug 1 3 70%-74% 3RM 65%-69% 3RM 60%-64% 1RM
Clean pul l (thigh block) 1 3 80%-84% 3RM 75%-79% 5RM 70%-74% 3RM
Bench thr owb 1 4 40%-44% 1RM 35%-39% 1RM 30%-34% 1RM
Lat pul ldown 1 10 70%-74% 8RM 65%-69% 8RM 60%-64% 8RM
Abdominal ex ercisea Max in 60 s
aAbdominal ex ercise of choice: si t-up, GHD si t-up, toes to bar , reverse crunch, or crunch.
bIntensi ty based of f 1RM bench pr ess.
Mesocycle 13
April 8-April 14
Focus: P ostseason testing (after in-season)
Microcycle 50 (1 Week)
2RM power exercise Power clean
Hang power snatch
Push jerk
Push pr ess
2RM for nonpower core exercises Back squat
Front squat
Bench pr ess
Other testing* Sit and r each
Shoulder elev ation
30-15 I ntermi ttent Fi tness T est
Line dri ll
T-test
Vertical jump
Isometric mid-thigh pul l test
Body composi tion (skinf olds)
*Other ex ercises to test based on in-season pr ogram.
Tournament Option A (Two Games)
Sunday Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday
Practice (or r est) Practice Practice Practice
Game PracticeGame
Resistance tr aining Resistance tr aining
1626
Tournament Option B (Two Games)
Sunday Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday
Practice (or
rest)GamePractice Practice Practice Practice Game
Resistance
trainingPlyometric
trainingResistance
training
Tournament Option C (Three Games Back-to-Back)
Sunday Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday
Practice (or
rest)Practice Practice Practice Practice Game Game
Resistance
trainingPlyometric
training
Sunday Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday
Game
RestPractice Practice Practice Practice Rest
Resistance
trainingResistance
trainingPlyometric
training
Comments
Each mesocy cle is consider ed a block of training and contains two or three individual microcycles;
unloading mesocy cles are strategical ly placed to occur before the next mesocy cle during the off-season
and pr eseason and ar e at k ey micr ocycles during the in-season.
This pr ogram incorpor ates v ariations in v olume-load, tr aining intensi ty, and tar geted tr aining ex ercises.
Repetition maximum loads are not used, as training to failure has been shown to reduce power output
and increase the risk of overtraining. Therefore, percentage ranges based off of RM loads are used to
deal wi th the ac cumulated f atigue associated wi th in-season tr aining and competi tions.
It is impor tant to note that these are the target sets and that 3 to 5 warm-up  sets should be performed
to provide an appr opriate speci fic warm-up f or the tar geted loadings.
Refer to table 18.8 (page 544) for the relationship between the %RM and the number of repetitions
allowed and table 18.9  (page 547 ) for the estimation of a 1RM.
Refer to table 18.15  (page 561 ) for rest period length assignment based on r epetition goal.
KEY TERMS
active rest
annual tr aining plan
basic str ength phase
competi tive period
daily undulating periodization
emphasis tr aining models
first tr ansition period
fitness–f atigue par adigm
1627
gener al adaptation syndr ome (GA S)
gener al preparatory phase
hypertr ophy or str ength–endur ance phase
linear periodization
macrocycle
maintenance
mesocy cle
microcycle
nonlinear periodization
parallel training models
peaking
periodization
preparatory period
recovery
restoration
second tr ansition period
sequential tr aining models
specific preparatory phase
stimulus–f atigue–r ecovery–adaptation  theory
strength/power phase
super compensation
traditional periodization
STUDY QUESTIONS
  1.  The duration of what phase of Selye’s gener al adaptation syndr ome will be
lengthened i f an athlete is under lar ge amounts of psy choemotional str ess?
  a.  alarm
  b.  resistance
  c.  super compensation
  d.  exhaustion
  2.  The early stages of a long-term athlete development plan best aligns with
which model of periodization?
  a.  par allel
  b.  sequential
  c.  emphasis
  d.  tr aditional
  3.  What can last between two and six weeks, with the most common duration
used b y strength and condi tioning pr ofessionals being f our weeks?
  a.  micr ocycle
1628
  b.  macr ocycle
  c.  mesocy cle
  d.  maxicy cle
  4.  A pr eparatory period corr esponds to what other part of the season?
  a.  postseason
  b.  in-season
  c.  pr eseason
  d.  of f-season
  5.  A hypertr ophy phase of tr aining best al igns wi th which phase?
  a.  gener al preparatory
  b.  speci fic preparatory
  c.  pr ecompeti tive
  d.  main competi tive
1629