# Section 22.2

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 22: Periodization

**Section:** 22.2 -- Periodization Cycles

**PDF Pages:** 1596--1610

back squat and leg curl). Generally, the athlete performs resistance training with
low to moder ate intensi ties for high v olumes ( table 22.3 ).
TABLE 22.3  A Periodized Model for Resistance Training
Period PreparatoryFirst
transition CompetitionSecond
transition
Phase Gener al preparatory Specific
preparatoryPrecompeti tiveMain competi tive Postcompeti tive
Season Off-season Preseason In-season Postseason
Emphasis Hypertr ophy/strength
endur anceBasic
strengthStrength/power Peaking orMaintenance Active rest
Intensity Low to moder ate High Low to v ery
highVery
high to
very
lowModer ate to
highRecreational
activities (ma y
not in volve
resistance
training)
50%-75% 1RM 80%-95%
1RM87%-95%
1RMa50% to
≥93%
1RM85%-93%
1RM
30%-85% of
1RMb
Volume High Moder ate
to highLow Very
lowLow to
moder ate
3-6 setsc2-6 setsc2-5 setsc 1-3
setsc~2-5 setsc
8-20 r eps 2-6 reps 2-5 reps 1-3
reps3-6 reps
aThese per centages of 1RM apply to nonpower cor e exercises.
bThese percentages of 1RM apply to power exercises. The actual percentage used to elicit power
development depends on the ex ercise that is used. F or mor e information, see K awamori and Haf f (55).
cThese recommenda tions do not include  warm-up sets and represent only target sets for core exercises (40);
they also do not include lower -intensi ty recovery days that are often part of a periodiz ed training plan (40,
89, 92).
Adapted from Haff and Haff (2012); Stone et al. (1981); Stone and O’Bryant (1987); Stone et al. (1982);
Stone et al. (2007).
Howev er, it is important to note that throughout this phase, daily variations in
training intensi ty and workload will facilitate recovery (35, 38). Additional ly,
recovery weeks or microcycles may be placed throughout the phase and most
often at the end of the phase bef ore the next phase of tr aining begins.
The hypertrophy or strength–endurance phase involves low to
moderate intensity (50%-75% of the 1RM) and high volumes (3 to
1596
6 sets of 8-20 repetitions).
Basic Strength Phase
In the later portion of the preparatory period, during the specific preparatory
phase, the primary aim of the basic strength phase  is to increase the strength
of the muscles  that are essential to the primary sport movements (12-14). For
example, the sprinter ’s runnin g program would progress to include interv al sprints
of a moder ate distance and more complex and special ized plyometric drills. The
resistance training program also becomes more specific to the sport (e.g., squat,
power clean, Bulgarian squat) and involves heavier loads performed at lower
volumes than in the hypertr ophy or strength–endur ance phase (table 22.3). As
with the hypertr ophy or strength–endur ance phase, daily variations in training
load f acilitate r ecovery (35, 38).
The basic strength phase involves higher intensity (80%-95% of
the 1RM) and moderate to high volumes (2 to 6 sets of 2 to 6
repetitions).
First Transition Period
As originally described by Stone and colleagues (89-91), the first transition
period  is a link between the preparatory and competi tive period s. Classical ly, the
resistance training in this period focuses on the development of strength and
power as noted in Stone, O’Bryant, and Garhammer ’s (89) seminal paper on the
periodization of strength training. The central aim of this period is to shift the
training focus toward the elevation of strength and its translation into power
development (89, 90). In order to maximiz e this process and facilitate recovery,
variations are observ ed in training intensi ty and workload  at the microcycle level
(35, 38). Additional ly, the last week of the period is marked by reduced volume,
intensi ty, or both to achiev e recovery before the beginning of the competi tive
period.
The main phase within the first transition period is the strength/power
phase . In this phase, for exampl e, the sprinter ’s interv al and speed training
intensi fies to near competi tive pace; speed drills are performed (e.g., sled towing,
sprints against  resistance, and uphill sprints); plyometric drills mimic sprinting;
and the resistance training program involves performing power and explosiv e
exercises at low to very high loads with low volumes. As explained in chapter 18,
the load assignments for power exercises do not follow the typical %RM–
repetition relationship , but their relative intensi ties are elevated during this phase
(table 22.3). Specifically, the exercises selected in this phase can dictate the
loading that is used (55). For example, the development of power may be
1597
facilitated with a load of 80% of the 1RM with power cleans performed from the
hang (55) or floor (17), while a load of 50% to 70% of the 1RM may be used
with the bench  press throw when the aim is to maximiz e power development
(55). Ultimately , to address both strength and power development, a mixed
training approach is warranted in which heavy- and low-load training is used to
optimiz e both at tributes (44).
The strength/power phase involves low to very high loads
(30%-95% of the 1RM, depending on the exercise) and low
volumes (2 to 5 sets for 2 to 5 repetitions).
Competitive Period
The central training target during the competitive period  is preparing the
athlete for competi tion by further increasing strength and power via additional
increases in training intensi ty while decreasing volume. This process can be a
delicate balanc ing act, because adequate volume and intensi ty of training are
needed to maintain competi tive preparedness, and reductions in volume,
intensi ty, or both are needed to optimiz e performanc e. To understand this
conundrum, consider the fitness–f atigue paradigm presented earlier. If training
workloads (volume or intens ity) are reduced too much, fatigue will be reduced,
but there will be a concomi tant decrease in overall fitness that results in a
reduction in competi tive preparedness. Also during this period, time spent
practicing sport-speci fic skills and tactics increases dramatical ly, and a
proportional decrease occurs in time spent performing physical condi tioning
activities such as resistance training. For example, a sprinter places even more
emphasis on speed, reaction  time, sprint -speci fic plyometric drills, and technique
training. The competi tive period may last for one or two weeks for some sports in
which a peaking program is emplo yed (6, 36, 69). Peaking  programs attempt to
place the athlete in peak condi tion for about one or two weeks. Trying to extend
this to longer durations ultimately results in reduced performance capaci ty as a
result of reduction in fitness or potential overtraining (36, 38). Depending on the
load-r eduction strategy emplo yed, peaking programs result in a progressive shift
from higher -intensi ty training toward lower -intensi ty work designed to reduce
fatigue as the athlete moves through the taper before competi tion (36). As shown
in table 22.3 (page 730), resistance training may range between 50% and ≥93%
of the 1RM, depending on wher e athletes ar e in the peaking pr ogram.
For team sports, this period spans an entire season and may last for many
months, requiring the use of a maintenance  program (5). Because of the
prolonged duration of the competi tive period in this situation, the intensi ty and
volume of training must be manipulated on a microcycle basis to maintain
1598
strength and power while managing the fatigue associated with a frequent
competi tion schedule. Gener ally, a maintenance program is marked by moder ate-
to high-intensi ty training (e.g., 85%-93% 1RM) at low to moder ate volumes. At
the microcycle level, the training loads are modulated based on the training,
travel, and competitive sched ule. Careful monitoring of the athlete’ s performance
capaci ty and recovery is critical during the team-spor t athlete’ s competi tive
period.
The competitive period includes peaking and maintenance. For
peaking, athletes use very high to low intensities (50% to ≥93% of
the 1RM) and very low volume (1 to 3 sets of 1 to 3 repetitions) for
one to two weeks. For maintenance, athletes modulate training
between moderate and high intensities (85%-93% of the 1RM)
with moderate volumes (about 2 to 5 sets of 3 to 6 repetitions).
Second Transition Period (Active Rest)
Between the competi tive season and the next annua l training plan or the
preparatory period of a macrocycle, a second trans ition period  is often used to
create a linkage (89). This period is sometimes referred to as an active rest or
restoration  period and gener ally lasts for one to four weeks (38). It is important
to note that if active rest is extended for a prolonged duration, athletes will
require a much longer preparatory period to regain their performance capaci ties
(39). Therefore, it is gener ally recommended that the second transition period
last no longer than four weeks unless an athlete requires additional time to
recover from an injury . Durin g this period, aggressive training immediately after
the peak performance or end of the maintenance phase should be avoided so
athletes can rehabi litate injuries and rest physical ly and mental ly (12-14). For
example, a sprinter may engage in recreational activities such as volleybal l, racket
sports, and swimming in a leisurely manner and perform very low-volume, non–
sport-speci fic resistance training with very low loads. A secondary use of the
active rest concept is to structur e one-week breaks between long phases (three
weeks) or periods of training. The purpose is to create an unloading week to
prepare the body for the subsequent phase or period of training. The practice of
reducing the training load via the reduction of training intensi ty and volume is
believed by many strength and condi tioning professionals to reduce overtraining
potential.
The second transition (active rest) provides a period of time in
which athletes can rehabilitate injuries and refresh both physically
and mentally before beginning a new annual training plan or
1599
macrocycle. This period should not last longer than four weeks,
because long periods with reduced training will require the athlete
to engage in a longer preparatory period to regain sporting form.
1600
Applying Sport Seasons to the Periodization
Periods
In practical terms, periodization involves a logical, systematic variation and
integr ation of training to direct the training responses while managing fatigue and
optimizing performance in accordance with the seasonal demands of the sport
and athletes. Based on the competi tive season, the overall annual plan or
macrocycle is structur ed to sequential ly develop specific attributes required by the
athlete. To avoid monoton y, staleness, and overtraining potential, the training
program must involve structu red variation of key training variables (e.g., volume,
intensi ty, training frequency , training foci, exercise selection) (41). Classical ly,
most intercollegiate and professional sports have an annua l schedule that includes
an off-season, preseason, in-season, and postseason. These seasons are easy to
relate to the periods in a periodiz ed training model ( figure 22.7).
Off-Season
The off-season  should be consider ed the preparatory period; it typical ly lasts from
the end of the postseason to the beginning of the preseas on, which can be about
six weeks before the first major competi tion (although this varies greatly). This
preparatory period is subdivid ed into gener al and specific preparatory phases that
are broken down into mesocy cles; these interlink to prepare the athlete for the
subsequent competi tive season. For example, the athlete may complete several
rotations of mesocy cles that focus on hypertr ophy/strength endur ance and basic
strength (figure 22.7). Ultimately, these cyclical rotations are selected based on
the sport and the athlete’ s needs. For example, if an American footbal l player
needs to gain muscle mass, more mesocy cles that target the hypertr ophy phase
will be pr escribed.
1601
FIGURE 22.7 Relationship of periodization periods to seasons and strength training focus. HP =
hypertr ophy/strength endur ance; BS = basic str ength; AR = activ e rest; SP =str ength/power .
Adapted from G.G. Haff, “The Essentials of Periodisation,” in Strength and Conditioning for Sports Performance, 2nd ed., edited by I. Jeffreys
and J. Moody (Routledge, 2021).
Preseason
After the comp letion of the off-season, the preseason is used to lead into the first
major competi tion. The first transition period is often undertak en at this time with
a focus on the strength/power phase of resistance training. This time is used to
prepare the athlete for the subsequent competi tive period . It is very important to
note that the preseason is not the time to build the foundational physical
capaci ties needed for the sport; this should occur primari ly in the off-season. The
preseason is designed to capitalize on the off-season and elevate the athlete’ s
performance capaci ty during the competi tive period.
In-Season
The competitive, or in-season , period contains all the contests scheduled for the
given year, including any tournament games. Most sports have a long season that
requires multiple mesocy cles arranged around key contests. Thus, a long
competi tive season (12-16+ weeks) presents unique programming challenges—in
these situation s, three- or four-week mesocy cle blocks that unload the athlete in
the last microcycle to allow for fatigue reducti on and performance
super compensation before critical contests (41). This does not mean that the
athlete is in poor condi tion for the other contests, becau se strategical ly varying
where training  days occur in conjunction with altering training intensi ties and
volumes across each microcycle can modulate preparedness and elevate
performance during congested competi tive schedules . Specifically, training
1602
intensi ty and volume are increased or decreased to maintain physical capaci ties
while reducing fatigue and elevating preparedness before the competi tive
engagements. During the in-season, monitoring activities are used to make
strategic decisions about how to vary training loads to more precisely prescribe
training to al ign wi th the athlete’ s curr ent state (11).
Postseason
After the final contest, the postseason or second transition period provides the
athlete with a relative or active rest before the beginning of the next year’s off-
season or preparatory period. It is important to remem ber that the longer the
postseason, the greater the chance for detraining, which results in an increased
need f or a longer gener al preparatory phase during the next of f-season (38).
1603
Undulating Versus Linear Periodization Models
For better or worse, contempor ary periodization literature has adopted the terms
linear and nonlinear when referring  to periodization models. Howev er, it should be
noted that a central tenet of periodization is the removal of lineari ty from training
(35, 38, 45, 51, 65, 72, 88). In fact, when developing his original model of
periodization Matveyev used Yakovlev’s concept of super compensation (104, 105)
as the basis for the need for training to be applied in a nonlinear and rhythmic
manner (59, 103). Matveyev (65) noted that removing lineari ty from the training
process and implementing appropriate training load variations provides a superior
method of tr aining.
Often the traditional resistance training model is falsely referred to as linear
due to the gradual and progressive mesocy cle increases in intensi ty over time (7,
51, 77). Howe ver, a closer look at the traditional model as described by Stone,
O’Bryant, and Garhammer (89, 91) and within the literature (51) shows that the
traditional model contains nonlinear variation in training intensity and volume-load
at the microcycle level and throughout the mesocy cle. Regardless of this, the
nonlinear periodization  model has been introduced in the strength and
condi tioning industry (2, 58, 79). Alternativ ely, this model is sometimes described
as an undulating or daily undulat ing periodization  model because it involves
larger daily (i.e., within the microcycle) fluctuations in the load and volume (e.g.,
repetitions and volume-load) of the assigned core resistan ce training exercise. For
example, when using this programming strategy one might perform 4 sets with a
6RM load (strength focus) on the first day of the week (e.g., Tuesda y), 3 sets with
a 10RM  (hypertrophic focus) on the next training day (e.g., Thursda y), and 5 sets
with a 3RM load (power focus) on the last training day (e.g., Saturday). In this
case the load, volume (e.g., repetitions and volume-load) , and training focus are
all modified within the microcycle. These modifications are in contrast to what
occurs with the traditional periodization  model, falsely referred to as the
linear periodization  model,  according to which the athlete performs the same
number of sets and repetitions across the training days and varies the training
load. For exam ple, the athlete may perform 4 sets of 6 at 85% of the 1RM on the
first day of training, at 75% of the 1RM on the second day, and at 65% of the
1RM on the third day to basically train using a heavy-to-light training structur e
and introduce variation to the training stimulus. While the traditional model
appears to vary only intensi ty because the repetitions do not change, one must
remember that the volume-l oad changes in this model result in undulations in
workload and training volume, supporting the idea that the traditional model is in
fact nonl inear and should not be classi fied as l inear (51, 88).
1604
Some resear ch studies suggest that the daily undula ting model is more
effective than the traditional model (21, 57, 67, 68, 79), although other evidence
suggests that no difference exists between these models (2, 10, 31, 78, 100, 101)
or that traditional models are superior (47, 48, 74, 75, 101). Proponents of the
daily undulatin g model suggest that one of its strengths is the absence of
accumulated neural fatigue caused by extended, ever-increasing training
intensi ties common to the traditional model (56). Conversely, proponents of the
traditional model suggest that the overall high volume-loads of training in the
undulating model result in greater peripher al fatigue and increased risk of injury
because of the high levels of metabol ic fatigue this type of programming can
stimulate (74, 75). Additionally, examination of the stimulus–f atigue–r ecovery–
adaptation theory (figure 22.3) and the fatigue–fi tness paradigm (figure 22.4)
indicates that the daily undulating model has the potential to decrease athlete
preparedness because of accumulated fatigue that occurs with higher volume-
load training sessions. Some authors suggest that, based on the GAS, this
response may actual ly increase the potential for overtraining with higher -level
athletes (35, 94) and result in an increased injury risk for athletes using this
model in conjunction wi th their sport -based tr aining.
1605
Example of an Annual Training Plan
A sample approach to designing a full annual training plan (i.e., macrocycle for
sports with one competi tive season) spanning all four sport seasons is presented
in figure 22.8 .
The annual plan example provided in this chapter defines a macrocycle that
lasts from May 1 until April 28. This macrocycle is subdiv ided into four seasons:
off-season (May 1-August 20), preseason (August 21-No vember 5), in-season
(November 6-April 14), and postseason (begins on April 15). Since there is only
one competi tive season in this annual training plan a single macrocycle structur e
has been used. This macrocycle is then subdivided into 14 mesocy cles, which
range in length between two and four weeks. Note:  The primary focus of this
sample annual training plan is to explain how to subdivide  the annual plan and to
design the resistance training  component. Although other modes of training are
described briefly (e.g., plyometrics, anaer obic condi tioning, aerobic endur ance)
and can be easily incorpor ated into the annual plan, this example is not intended
to illustrate every aspect of a strength and condi tioning program for basketball.
For more information on how to structur e an annual training plan, consul t NSCA ’s
Guide to Pr ogram Design  (41).
Off-Season
Following the postseason active rest period, the athlete should be rested and
ready to begin off-season (preparatory period) training. For this example, this
preparatory period lasts about 16 weeks, from May 1 until August 20. The goal of
this period is to establ ish a base level of condi tioning to increase the athlete’ s
tolerance for more intense training in later phases and periods. In this example,
mesocy cle 1 is used to expose the athlete to initial strength and condi tioning
activities at low intensi ties and volumes to reintroduce them to training. Across
the first two microcycles training intensi ty increases in preparation for
performance testing that is planned for microcycle 3. During these first three
weeks training loads are applied based on the athlete’ s rating of perceived
exertion or based on of the repetition-in-r eserv e scale presented in chapter 18.
During microcycle 3 the training loads for all non-tested activities will be reduced
so that the athletes can partake in a series of initial pretesting to establ ish the
initial training loads for the exercises in the second mesocy cle. In later
mesocy cles, when more or other exercises are added, the training loads can be
estimated from loads used in similar exercises or can be determined from RM
testing. For example, the strength and condi tioning professional can reasonably
predict training  load for the hang clean from the tested power clean maximum, or
the actual RM load could be measur ed. Other monitoring tests related to
1606
basketball are shoulder and hip flexibi lity tests, 30-15 intermittent fitness test,
300-yard (274 m) shuttle, line drill, T-test, vertical jump, isometric mid-thigh pull,
and skinf old measur ements (see chapter 14  for testing pr otocols).
The resistance training comp onent holds higher priority in the off-season, and
an athlete may follow a split routine of four or more training days per week. In
this example, the basketball player begins the off-season with a total body, three-
times-per -week regimen but soon progresses to four training days per week with
variations in training intens ity across the microcycle to allow fatigue to be
managed. These advancements also involve a gradual increase in loading, with
associated decreases in training volume as the athlete shifts his or her training
focus toward maximizing strength development. Other training includes sprint and
agility training  as well as plyometrics and metabol ic condi tioning. These
condi tioning workouts are scheduled on nonresistance training days, and flexibi lity
training should be emphasiz ed in the warm-up and cool-down portions of each
training session.
FIGURE 22.8  Sample annual plan f or a f emale bask etball athlete.
Preseason
After undertaking one or two unloading weeks following the cessation of the off-
season training period, the athlete begins the preseason  period of training. For
this example, the period covers 11 weeks (August 21-October 5). The goals of the
preseason are to increase the intensi ty of sport-speci fic training and the attention
given to basketball drills and skills. The resistance training portion is planned for
three days per week and focuses primari ly on strength and power outcomes.
Other training modes (e.g., plyometrics and anaer obic condi tioning) hold high
priority, especial ly if they dir ectly contribute to bask etball training.
1607
In-Season
After an unloading week following the preseason, the athlete is ready to begin the
competi tive period of training. The in-season period lasts approximately 22
weeks, spanning a time period from November until April (including a four-week
tournament period, although it could last longer). The goals for the in-season are
to maintain and possibly improve strength, power , flexibility, and anaer obic
condi tioning. The time constr aints of games, skill and strategy practice, and travel
result in a lower volume of off-court training activities. Due to multiple games
each week, resistance training may be limited to 30 minutes, one to three times
per week, consisting of an undulating regimen of varying volume-loads and
relative intensi ties. Power and basketball-speci fic nonpower core exercises
predominate, with assistance exercises added for balan ce. See the sample in-
season program near the end of this chapter . Plyometric sessions should be
alternated with resistance training and conducted once or twice weekly ,
depending on the number of games.
On days when no resistance training is scheduled, 15 to 20 minutes of various
short sprint interv als could be performed once or twice weekly during practice.
Speed, agility, and other running condi tioning can be incorpor ated into practice
time, and flexibility training can be part of the practice and game warm-up and
cool-down. Two or three days of rest should be afforded between resistance
training, plyometrics, and sprint interv al sessions, depending on the game
schedule. This period is similar to the previous training period in that the majori ty
of the athlete’ s time is spent on skill and strategy development, with the
remainder dev oted to condi tioning.
The athlete is in good condi tion from the previous mesoc ycles, so she should
be able not only to maintain that condi tion but also to peak again if the team
continues in the conference tournament. If the tournament game schedule does
not allow for more than one resistance training session per week, the athlete
should perform all the week’ s power and core exercises (if time allows) and omit
the assistance exercises. Two examples of specific weekly tournament schedules
are presented near the end of this chapter .
Postseason (Active Rest Period)
Following the completion of the competi tive season is a (second) transition period
of active rest with no formal or structur ed workouts. For this example, the
transition period lasts a month (April 15-Ma y 12). The goal of the period is for the
athlete to recuper ate physical ly and psychological ly from the long in-season.
Recreational games and fitness activities include swimming, jogging, circuit
weight training, volleybal l, racquetbal l, and informal basketball. All activities are
performed at low intensi ties wi th low v olumes.
1608
Reviewing the Annua l Plan Example
For any periodization mode l to function optimal ly, the sport coach and the
strength and condi tioning professional must plan the program together to share
goals and strategies. This is a critical issue in that working together allows all the
training factors that the athlete will engage in to be integr ated so as to better
manage the training stress and modulate fatigue and recovery. Without the
cooper ation of all involved professionals, optimal performance cannot be fully
achiev ed.
The example in this chapter is a representation of only one periodization model
that could be used to struct ure training for a sample athlete. Other athletes or
sports may require subtle to radical variations in the structur e presented here. It
is important to remember that a multitude of period ization models can be
adapted to meet the needs of the v arious athletes and sports.
1609
Conclusion
Periodization is a process through which the athlete’ s training is logical ly and
systematical ly organized to optimiz e preparedness and increase performance
potential for the most impor tant competi tions. The annua l training plan (year of
training) is divided into macrocycles that contain preparatory, competi tive, and
transition periods. Each period is subdivided into mesocy cles that target specific
phases of development: hypertrophy/strength endur ance, basic strength, or
strength/power . Transitions are used to link mesocy cles or macrocycles and
provide the athlete with an unloading period that enhances recovery. The overall
structur e of the macrocycle, mesocy cle, and individual microcycles is dictated by
the individual sport ’s competi tive season and demands.
Off-Season
Female Col lege B asketball Center
16 weeks: Ma y 1-August 20
Mesocycle 1
May 1-Ma y 14
Focus: B asic str ength
Microcycles 1-2 (2 weeks)
Day ExerciseWeek 1 Week 2
Sets Reps Intensity Sets Reps Intensity
Mon/Fri Power clean 2 3/1a 5-6 RPE
(4-5 RIR)3 3/1a 7-7.5 RPE
(2-3 RIR)
Back squat 2 5 5-6 RPE
(4-5 RIR)3 5 7-7.5 RPE
(2-3 RIR)
Bench pr ess 2 5 5-6 RPE
(4-5 RIR)3 5 7-7.5 RPE
(2-3 RIR)
Single-leg squat 2 8/8b 5-6 RPE
(4-5 RIR)3 8/8b 7-7.5 RPE
(2-3 RIR)
Lying triceps extension 2 8 5-6 RPE
(4-5 RIR)3 8 7-7.5 RPE
(2-3 RIR)
Glute ham r aise 2 10 5-6 RPE 3 10 7-7.5 RPE
a3/1 represents a cluster set wi th a 20-second r est between each r ep.
b8/8 = 8 r eps per side.
1610