# Section 23.2

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 23: Rehabilitation, Reconditioning, and Medical Issues

**Section:** 23.2 -- Types of Injury

**PDF Pages:** 1639--1648

inflammation, tendon cell damage or death, and
neovascularization  (83).
Strength and Conditioning Summary
Date:  October 23, 2025
Name:  Molly Jackson
Sport:  Soccer
Position: Midfield
Diagnosis:  Grade II right MCL spr ain
Injury date:  October 9, 2025
Activity Summary
Number of sessions:  7
Date begun:  October 16, 2025
Current Activities
Activity Sets Reps Resistance (lb)
Half squat 3 10 115
Leg extension 3 10 60
Leg flexion 3 10 50
Heel r aise 3 15 95
Time Speed
Stationary bicy cle 20 min 80 rpm
Stair stepper 20 min 70 ft per min
Jogging 10 min 5.0 mph
Assessment
No difficulty with hal f squats; ma y incr ease squat depth to thr ee-quarters.
Suggestions
Increase squat depth; incr ease jogging speed and time.
Jill Michaels, CSCS      October 23, 2025
FIGURE 23.2  A sample str ength and condi tioning summary f orm, which r ecords the
athlete’ s curr ent activi ties and r esponses to those activi ties.
1639
Tissue Healing
The process of returning to competi tion following injury involves the
healing of the injured tissues and the preparation of these  tissues for
the return to function. To better understand the role of the strength
and condi tioning professional during rehabi litation and
recondi tioning, it is necessary to review the gener al phases of tissue
healing following musculosk eletal injury (34, 36). The timing of the
events occurring within each phase of tissue healing differs for each
tissue type and is affected by a variety of systemic and local factors,
including age, lifestyle, degree of injury , comorbidi ties, and the
structur e that has been damaged. Moreover, the phases  of healing
progress along  a continuum with no defini tive timelines. Howev er, all
tissues f ollow the same basic pat tern of heal ing (table 23.1 ).
TABLE 23.1  Tissue Healing
Inflammatory response phase
 Pain, swel ling, and r edness
Decreased col lagen synthesis
Increased number of inflammatory cel ls
Fibroblastic repair phase
 Collagen fiber pr oduction
Decreased col lagen fiber or ganization
Decreased number of inflammatory cel ls
Maturation–remodeling phase Proper col lagen fiber al ignment
Increased tissue str ength
The process of returning to competition following injury
involves healing of the injured tissues, preparation of
these tissues  for the return to function, and use of
proper techniques to maximize rehabilitation and
reconditioning.
1640
Inflammatory Response Phase
Inflammation  is the initial reaction to injury (34, 36) and is
necessary for normal tissue healing to occur. Both local and systemic
inflammation occur during the inflammatory response  phase ,
allowing the eventual healing and replacement of damaged tissue.
During the inflammatory phase, several events transpire that
contribute to both tissue healing and an initial decrease in function.
The injured area becomes red and swollen due to changes in
vasculari ty, blood flow, and capillary permeabi lity. After tissues are
damaged, a locally hypoxic environment leads to a certain amount of
tissue death that allows the release of several chemical mediators,
including histamine and bradykinin. These substances further
increase blood flow and capillary permeabi lity in this local area,
thereby promoting edema and fluid accumulation into the
surrounding tissues. Edema  elevates intraarticular pressure, which
inhibi ts the motor neurons required for muscle activation (22, 84).
Thus, edema can lead to muscle weakness and atrophy as well as
limited function (22, 59). Tissue debris and pathogens (i.e.,
infectious agents) are removed from the injured area by increased
blood flow and a process called phagocytosis ; phagocytosis involves
macrophages (i.e., a type of white blood cell), which engulf cellular
debris to speed tissue healing. Additional ly, fibroblast cells in nearb y
tissues are activated and begin to migrate toward the injury site to
assist with healing. At this time, macrophages and platelets within
the injured area release growth facto rs that assist in the transition
to the fibr oblastic r epair phase (see next section).
The inflamma tory substance s present during this phase may
result in stimulation of pain receptors (i.e., nociceptors), causing the
injured athlete to sense pain, further contributing to decreased
function. This phase typical ly lasts 72 hours following an acute injury
but may last longer with a compr omised blood supply and more
severe structur al damage. Though the inflammatory phase is critical
to tissue healing, if it does not end within a reasonable amount of
1641
time, the phases that follow may not occur, thereby delaying the
rehabi litation pr ocess.
Fibroblastic Repair Phase
Once the inflammatory phase has subsided, tissue repair  begins
(34, 36); the fibroblastic repair  phase, also known as the
proliferative phase , is characteriz ed by catabol ism (tissue
breakdown) and replacement of tissues that are no longer viable
following injury . In an attempt to improve tissue integri ty, new
capillaries and connectiv e tissue (scar tissue) form in the area.
Fibroblasts from the inflamm atory phase, with the help of growth
factors, begin to synthesiz e type III collagen, which is randomly
deposi ted along the injured structur e and serves as the framework
for tissue regener ation. This newly formed tissue is weaker than the
original tissue; thus optimal strength of the new tissue is not yet
achiev ed. Collagen fibers are strongest when they lie longitudinal ly
(i.e., parallel) to the primary  line of stress, yet many of the new
fibers are positioned transversely , which limits their ability to
efficiently transmit force. This phase of tissue healing begins as early
as 72 hours after injury and ma y last up to two months.
Maturation–Remodeling Phase
The matur ation–r emodel ing phase of healing often overlaps with the
fibroblastic reparative phase and may begin as early as a few weeks
after injury . During the maturation–remodeling  phase of healing
the weakened tissue produced during the repair phase is
strengthened (34, 36). During this phase, new collagen fibers have
shifted to a stronger type I collagen, allowing the newly formed
tissue the opportuni ty to improve its structur e, strength, and
function. With increased loading, the collagen fibers of the newly
formed scar tissue (a collection of cells and collagen that have
repaired damaged tissue) begin to hypertr ophy and align themselv es
along the lines of stress (29). The thicker and more optima lly aligned
collagen fibers become stronger , allowing a return to function.
1642
Although strength of the collagen fibers and healing tissue improves,
this tissue is not as strong as the normal healthy tissue it has
replaced. Tissue remodeling  in the matur ation–r emodel ing phase
can last months to y ears after injury (34 , 36, 54).
Following injury, all damaged tissues go through the
same genera l phases of healing: inflammation, repair,
and remodeling. The timing of the events occu rring
within each phase of tissue healing differs for each
tissue type and is affected by a variety of systemic and
local factors, including age, lifestyle, degree of injury,
comorbidities, and the structure that has been
damaged. Characteristic events define each phase and
separate one phase from another.
1643
Goals of Rehabilitation and
Reconditioning
The strength and condi tioning professional must consider both the
athlete’ s subjective response to injury and the physiological
mechanisms of tissue healing; both are essential in relation to an
athlete’ s return to optimal performance. The process of returning to
competi tion following injury involves healing of the injured tissues,
preparation of these tissues for the return to function, and use of
proper techniq ues to maximiz e rehabi litation and reconditioning.
While the goal is often a rapid resumption of activity, it is important
to remember that each athlete responds differently to injury and
thus pr ogresses uniquely during r ehabi litation.
As a preface to discussion of the goals of treatment during injury
rehabi litation, two points must be made. First, healing tissue must
not be overstressed (70). During tissue healing, controlled
therapeutic stress is necessary to optimiz e collagen matrix formation
(8, 29), but too much stress can damage new structur es and
significantly slow the athlete’ s return to competi tion. This means
choosing a level of loading that provides neither too much stress nor
too little stress to the athlete ’s healing tissue. It should be obvious
that when one is choosing the load, it is necessary to consider the
phase of healing and athlete type. For example, an exercise that
provides too little tissue loading during the matur ation– remodel ing
phase may provide too much  loading (increased tissue stress) during
the inflammatory response phase. Further , an exercise that provides
too little stress to a professional basketball center may be excessiv e
for an amateur cross country runner . The plane of movement is
another necessary consider ation. As an example, the medial
collateral ligament of the knee is subject to the greatest stress when
loaded in the frontal plane (i.e., valgus stress) during terminal knee
extension. Therefore, if the athlete has a medial collateral ligament
injury , frontal plane movemen ts (valgus stress) such as a lateral box
1644
jump or a side (lateral) shuffle should be avoided during early
healing phases. Howev er, those frontal plane movements should
probably be included in some f orm during the later phases.
Second, the athlete must meet specific objectiv es to progress
from one phase of healing to the next (98, 99). These  objectiv es
may depend on range of motion, strength, or activity. It is the
responsibi lity of the team physician, athletic trainer, physical
therapist, or a combination of these professionals to establ ish these
guidel ines.
Healing tissu e must not be overstressed, but controlled
therapeutic stress is necessary to optimize collagen
matrix formation. The athlete must meet specific
objectives to progress from one phase of healing to the
next.
Inflammatory Response Phase
The first response to an injury is inflammation, a reaction that is
essential for subsequent healing but also important to manage
properly so as to not r etard the r ehabi litation pr ocess.
Treatment Goal
The primary goal for treatment during the inflammatory response
phase is to prevent disruption of new tissue. A healthy environment
for new tissue regener ation and formation is essential for preventing
prolonged inflammation and disruption of new blood vessel and
collagen production, which can prolong the injury . Relative rest from
strenuous activity and physical agents  (e.g., modal ities) including
ice, compression, elevation, and electrical stimulation are often
primary treatment options to minimiz e tissue damage and decrease
acute pain, but results on efficacy have been mixed (63, 93). One
important consider ation is that evidence has shifted from the
Protection Rest Ice Compr ession Elevation (PRICE) approach to the
Protection Optimal Loading Compr ession Ice Elevation (POLICE)
1645
approach for the managemen t of injuries in the inflammatory stage
of healing as a result of improved outcome measur es and faster
recovery (5, 20).
It is also impor tant to realize that a quick return to functio n relies
on the health of other body tissues. Therefore, the power , strength,
and endur ance of the musculosk eletal tissues and the function of the
cardiorespiratory system must be maintained. The strength and
condi tioning professional can provide significant knowledge and
expertise in this area. To accompl ish these tasks, the strength and
condi tioning professional should consul t with the athletic trainer to
determine which types of exercises are indicated and contraindicated
for the specific injury . Maximal protection of the injured structur es is
the primary goal during this phase. Assuming that this requirement
is fulfilled, exercises may include gener al aerobic and anaer obic
training and resistance training of the uninjur ed extremities. If
movement of the injured limb is not contraindicated, isolated
exercises that target areas proximal and distal to the injured area
may also be permissible provided that they do not stress the injured
area. Examples include hip abduction and external rotation exercises
following a knee injury (24, 39, 65) or scapula-stabi lizing exercises
following a shoulder injury (57 , 94, 100).
To Ice or Not to Ice
Ice applications, also referred to as cryotherapy , have been used for centuries to
decrease pain and inflammation following an injury (51). Advancements in
cryotherapy methods from ice packs or ice massage and cold-water immersion to
more advanced devices such as continuous cooling systems, vapor and gaseous
sprays, and total body cooling have emerged, providing numer ous application
options. As part of the POLICE method for the management of acute injuries,  early
pain-f ree movemen t and ice are emphasiz ed (5, 20). Howev er, the use of ice has
been questioned in both the strength and condi tioning and allied health
professions due to the potential for delaying natural post-injury healing processes
and impeding muscle performance (52). These concerns, largely unsupported in
the literature, stem from the potential of ice to cause a vasoconstriction of blood
vessels (45), which  may limit the ability of healing agents to reach the site of
injury . While this concern is reasonable, there is no evidence that icing alone
1646
following an injury may impede healing in human subjects. Contr adictory evidence
exists to determi ne if reductions in muscle performance occur following
cryotherapy (31, 41).
Evidence pertaining  to cryotherapy after injury has supported a pain-r elieving
analgesic effect via reduced nerve conduction velocity, with additional benefi ts that
include a suppr ession of the inflamma tory response with the potential to reduce
swelling and enhanced return to sport (6, 31, 35, 37, 51, 96). Following exercise,
evidence supports the use of cryotherapy to reduce symptoms of delayed onset
muscle soreness (DOMS); howev er, systemic reductions in insulin-like growth
factor (IGF) and protein synthesis may occur, impairing recovery (23, 73, 96).
Thus, cryotherapy is recommended in the acute inflammatory stage as part of the
POLICE strategy (20). A 15-minute duration is adequate when ice packs, ice
massage, and cold-water immersion are used (31). Cold-water immersion (<59 °F
[<15 °C]) is a more efficient option when a larger coverage area is needed (e.g.,
whole hand or ankle) and is likely to have a greater effect on cooling deeper tissue
(31). Local cryotherapy applications beyond the acute inflammatory phase are not
warranted. Although cryotherapy may reduce DOMS and be effective when rapid
recovery is needed, routine use is not recommended because it may impair protein
synthesis (23).
Exercise Strategies
Although a rapid return to competi tion is often a goal, protectiv e
loading, also known as active rest, of the injured area is initially
necessary to safeguar d the damaged tissue from additional injury .
Therefore, painful or intense exercise directly involving or stressing
the injured area is not recommended during this phase. Exercises
that do not directly involve or stress the injured area (e.g., upper
extremity exercises for lower extremity injury , single-leg  exercises
with the uninvolved limb) and pain-f ree active movement of the
involved area of injury ma y still be perf ormed.
Fibroblastic Repair Phase
After the inflammatory response phase, the body begin s to repair
the damaged tissue with similar new tissue; howev er, the resiliency
of this new tissue is low at this time. Repair of the weakened injury
site can take up to eight weeks if the proper amount of restorative
stress is appl ied, or longer i f too much or too l ittle str ess is appl ied.
1647
Treatment Goal
The treatment goal during the fibroblastic repair phase is to prevent
excessiv e muscle atrophy and joint deterior ation of the injured area.
In addition, a precarious balance must be maintained in which
disruption of the newly formed collagen fibers is avoided but low-
load stresses are gradual ly introduced to allow increased collagen
synthesis and prevent loss of joint motion. To protect the new,
relatively weak collagen fibers in the early reparative phase, the
athlete should avoid active resistiv e exercise involving the damaged
tissue and may opt for submaximal activities such as functional
movements against gravity or isometric resistance. Too little activity,
though, can also have a deleterious effect, because newly formed
fibers will not optimal ly align and may form adhesions (abnormal
collection of cells and collagen that lack pliability), thereby
preventing full motion. Early protected motion hastens the optimal
alignment of collagen fibers and promotes improved tissue mobility.
As in the inflammatory phase, therapeutic modal ities are permissible,
but their goal during repair is to promote collagen synthesis and
manage pain. Ultrasound, electrical stimulation, and ice are
continued in order to support and hasten new tissue formation (40,
82). Again, maintenance of muscular and cardiorespiratory function
remains essential for the uninjur ed areas of the body. The strength
and condi tioning professional has consider able expertise to offer the
other members of the allied health team regarding selection of the
appropriate activities. Possible exercise forms during the repair
phase include strengthening of the uninjur ed extremities and areas
proximal and distal to the injury, aerobic and anaer obic exercise, and
improving str ength and neur omuscular contr ol of the in volved areas.
Exercise Strategies
The following exercises should be used during the repair phase only
after consul tation with the team physician, athletic trainer, or
physical therapist. Isometric exercise may be performed , provided
that it is pain free and otherwise indicated by the physician or
1648