# Section 23.4

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 23: Rehabilitation, Reconditioning, and Medical Issues

**Section:** 23.4 -- Rehabilitation Goals

**PDF Pages:** 1659--1668

Program Design
The area in which strength and condi tioning professiona ls can best
contribute to the rehabi litation and recondi tioning process is the
provision of resistance and aerobic training programs designed for
the injured athlete. Their experience in prescribing exercise for
uninjur ed athletes gives strength and condi tioning professionals the
ability to properly adapt training programs for those recovering from
injury . Although protocols do exist for exercise prescription following
injury , many do not incorpor ate sport-speci fic program design
variables; the same principles  used to design resistance and aerobic
training programs for uninjur ed athletes should be applied during
rehabi litation and r econdi tioning.
Resistance Training
Several programs have been developed to assist with the design of
resistance training programs (16, 21, 47, 89, 104), and many of
these programs have been advocated for use in the rehabi litation
setting (16, 47, 104). Both the DeLorme (16) and Oxford (104)
programs use 3 sets of 10 repetitions with a pyramid-t ype design.
DeLorme’ s program progresses from light to heavy resistance. The
initial set involves 10 repetitions of 50% of the athlete’ s 10-repetition
maximum (10RM), the second set increases the resistance  to 75% of
the 10RM, and the final set requires 100% of the 10RM  (16, 17).
The Oxford system (104) is the reverse of DeLorme’ s system; that is,
it progresses from heavy to light resistance. The first set performed
is 100% of the athlete’ s 10RM , the second is 75% of the 10RM, and
the third is 50% of the 10RM (104). Unlike the DeLorme system,
which has a built-in warm-up from progressive increases in
resistance, the Oxford system begins with heavy resistanc e. Thus, a
non-fatiguing w arm-up set should be consider ed.
Knight ’s (47) daily adjustable progressive resistive exercise
(DAPRE)  system requires and allows more manipulation of intensi ty
and volume than either the DeLorme or the Oxford system (16, 17,
1659
104); DAPRE involves 4 sets, with repetitions ranging from 10 to
possibly only 1 during the final set. The first set requires 10
repetitions of 50% of the estimated 6RM, and the second set
requires 6 repetitions of 75% of the estimated 6RM. The third set in
the DAPRE requires the maximum number of repetitions of 100% of
the estimated 6RM; the number of repetitions performed during the
third set determines the adjustment made in resistance for the
fourth set (table 23.2) (48). The DeLorme, Oxford, and Knight
systems are protocols that have been shown to increase muscle
strength (17, 48, 104) and may be appropriate when one is
designing rehabilitation resistance training programs. Howev er,
athletes require rehabi litation  and recondi tioning programs tailored
to the demands of their respective sports. Although these protocols
(17, 48, 104) are establ ished strengthening programs, they may be
too strict to al low individual ization f or athletes in di fferent sports.
TABLE 23.2  Resistance Adjustments for Daily
Adjustable Progressive Resistance Exercise (DAPRE)
Protocol
Number of repetitions
performed during set 3Adjusted resistance for
set 4Resistance for next
exercise session
0-2 Subtr act 5-10 lb (2.3-4 .5
kg)
and repeat the set—
3-4 Same r esistance or
subtract 5 lb (2.3 kg)Same r esistance
5-7 Same r esistance Add 5-10 lb (2.3-4 .5 kg)
8-12 Add 5-10 lb (2.3-4 .5 kg) Add 5-15 lb (2.3-6.8 kg)
13+ Add 10-15 lb (4 .5-6.8 kg) Add 10-20 lb (4 .5-9.1 kg)
Adapted by permission from K. L. Knight, “Knee Rehabi litation by the Daily Adjustable
Progressive Resistiv e Exercise Techniq ue,” American Journal of Sports Medicine  7, no. 6
(1979): 336-337 , Copyright © 1979. R eprinted b y Permission of Sage Publ ications.
1660
Programs for both the healthy and the damaged tissues of an
injured athlete require the same basic design principles provided in
chapter 18. According to the specific adaptation to imposed
demands (SAID) principle, the system will adapt to the demands
placed on it. Therefore, the goal of training (speci fic adaptation)
should dictate the design of the resistance training program
(imposed demands). For example, during the remodel ing phase of
an injured marathoner ’s patellofemoral rehabi litation, his or her
quadriceps muscles should be trained with an emphasis on muscular
endur ance. Therefore, the athlete should perform many repetitions
of the rehabi litation exercises to prepare the muscles for the
demands of long-distance running. Conversely , a weightl ifting
athlete rehabi litating from the same injury requires fewer repetitions
of high-intensi ty rehabi litation and recondi tioning exercises during
the later portions of the remodeling phase to prepare the muscles
for the power demands of this sport. Refer to table 23.3 for a
compar ative example of the rehabi litation strategies for these two
athletes.
Aerobic and Anaerobic Training
Although resear ch has yet to determine an optimal aerobic training
program for use in the rehabilitation setting, it is gener ally accepted
that the program should mimic specific sport and metabol ic demands
as closely as possible. The strength and condi tioning professional,
having a backgr ound in designing and implementing conditioning
exercises for healthy athlete s, is the ideal member of the allied
health team to prescribe and supervise the aerobic training portion
of the injured athlete’ s recondi tioning program. As with the
resistance training program, the strength and conditioning
professional must consider the demands that the given sport places
on the injured athlete. Keeping these demands and the
contraindications of the injury in mind, the strength and condi tioning
professional can use the prescription guidel ines in chapters 17 and
1661
20 to create an appropriate training program to allow an
uncompl icated r eturn to competi tion.
TABLE 23.3  Application of Design Principles for
Resistance Training Programs During Rehabilitation
and Reconditioning From Patellofemoral Injury
Phase of
healingDesign
variableAthlete
Marathon runner Weightlifter
Inflammatory
response
phaseGoals and
exercisesNone that r equire
quadriceps activi ty—relative
rest of this ar ea needed to
reduce inflammation
Maintenance of muscular
strength and endur ance of
adjacent ar eas (i.e. , hip
extensors, knee flex ors, and
plantar flex ors)
Maintenance of
cardiovascular fi tnessNone that r equire
quadriceps activi ty—
relative rest of this ar ea
needed to r educe
inflammation
Maintenance of muscular
strength and power of
adjacent ar eas (i.e. , hip
extensors, knee flex ors,
and plantar flex ors)
Maintenance of upper
body muscular str ength
and power
Fibroblastic
repair phaseGoals and
exercisesIsometric quadriceps
strengthening at f ull knee
extension (pr ogressing to
multiple angles)
Progress to pain-f ree
isotonic quadriceps
strengthening (f ollowing
consul tation wi th sport
medicine team)
Continue ex ercise of
adjacent ar eas
Continue aer obic ex ercise;
may begin stationary
bicycle or stair stepper (per
recommendation of sports
medicine team)Isometric quadriceps
strengthening at f ull
knee extension
(progressing to mul tiple
angles)
Progress to pain-f ree
isotonic quadriceps
strengthening (f ollowing
consul tation wi th sport
medicine team)
Continue ex ercise of
adjacent ar eas
Continue upper body
muscular str ength and
power ex ercises
Sets ×
repetitions2-3 × 15-20 3-4 × 8-10
1662
Intensi ty Submaximal (≤50% 1RM) Submaximal (≤50% 1RM)
Matur ation–
remodel ing
phaseGoals and
exercisesBegin mor e sport -speci fic
activities, mo vements, and
speeds
Return to running, gr adual ly
increasing distance and
speed as toler ated
Add lunge and squat
(increase knee r ange of
motion as able)Begin mor e sport -
specific activi ties,
movements, and speeds
Increase mo vement
speeds to those simi lar
to competi tion
Add R omanian deadl ift
and squat (incr ease
knee r ange of motion as
able)
Sets ×
repetitions2-3 × 15-20 4-5 × 3-8
Intensi ty Progress to maximal intensi ty
(50%-75% 1RM)Progress to maximal
intensi ty (>75% 1RM)
Again consider rehabi litation from a patellofemoral injury for a
marathon runner , a wrestler, and a weightl ifter; the metabol ic energy
demands of their rehabi litation and recondi tioning are markedly
different. For the marathon runner ’s goals, aerobic fitness is of much
greater concern and must be addressed immediately . The metabol ic
demands for the wrestler involve a combination of aerobic and
anaer obic systems; therefore, interv al training is more appropriate
(27). In contrast, the weightl ifter’s program would focus on
maintaining anaer obic fitness. Selecting the appropriate training
device depends on the region of the body that is injured. While
specificity of training is important, gains in exercise capaci ty can be
made through exercise of other body regions (i.e., upper extremity
exercise to improve oxygen consumption) (92). A variety of options
exist to modify aerobic and anaer obic training, including the upper
body ergomete r, deep- water running, lower extremity cycling, and
elliptical machines. Strategies to maintain cardiovascular fitness can
be implemented early, even during the inflammatory  response
phase. As already emphasiz ed, it is important to remember that to
allow optimal healing, attempts should be made to initially minimiz e
stress to healing tissues, but relevant stresses can be applied to
1663
uninjur ed areas. An example  would be for a soccer player with an
acute right knee injury . Although options for right lower extremity
strengthening may be initially limited, exercises may still be
performed for the upper extremity as well as the uninvolved left
lower extremity (e.g., single-leg squat with weights). The strength
and condi tioning professional may need to modify uninvolved left
lower extremity exercises to ensur e that the involved right lower
extremity is protected. Exercises targeting the uninvolved limb can
improve muscl e strength in the involved limb (55, 56). Thus it is
important for injured athlete s to continue to perform strength and
condi tioning ex ercises f or the unin volved body r egions.
Designing strength and conditioning program s for
injured athle tes requires the strength and conditi oning
professional to examine the rehabilitation and
reconditioning goals to determine what type of program
will allow the quickest return to competition.
1664
Reducing Risk of Injury and Reinjury
In addition to using strength training and condi tioning strategies
when rehabi litating athletes from injuries, strength and condi tioning
professionals can implement resear ch findings to reduce both risk for
initial injury and risk of reinjury following injury (77, 90). Structur ed
programs have been developed for the lower (25, 28, 33, 76) and
upper extremities (57, 101). These programs are often sport specific
and addr ess common risk f actors f or injury .
Previous injury  is one of the most substantial risk factors for
future injury in active individuals (30, 75, 86, 91). Risk factors for
upper extremity injury include decreased glenohumer al range of
motion, scapular dyskinesis (i.e., abnormal scapular movement), and
decreased shoulder strength (9, 13, 101). Among overhead athletes,
shoulder internal rotation range of motion restrictions have been
shown to increase the risk for shoulder injury , whereas shoulder
external rotation and flexion range of motion restrictions are
associated with elbow injuries (7, 11, 42). Range of motion exercises
and the Throwers Ten are often used as a structur ed program to
reduce upper extremity injury risk (102). The Throwers Ten program
includes a specific set of upper extremity exercises and movements
designed to improve muscle performance as required for throwing
activities (26). Additional exercises shown to reduce the risk of upper
extremity injury among athletes include strengthening the shoulder
external rotators (figures 23.7a, b) and stretching the shoulde r to
improve internal rotation (figures 23.8a, b) (14, 49, 64, 66, 78). Risk
factors for lower extremity injury include decreased balance,
decreased neuromuscular control during jump landing, and
decreased lower extremity muscle strength (3, 53, 103). Structur ed
lower extremity programs to reduce injury risk should be sport
specific and should focus on neuromuscular control during activities
such as landing from a jump and cutting. Two exercises that may be
used to reduce  this risk of injury to the lower extremities are proper
jumping and landing technique during plyometric exercise (figure
1665
23.9a) and a single-leg squat to emphasiz e unilateral strength
(figure 23.9 b, c).
Previous injury is one of the most substantial risk
factors for future injury in active individuals. Lower
extremity programs designed to reduce injury risk
should be specific to a sport’s demands and should focus
on the neuromuscular control required during specific
activities such as landing from a jump and cutting.
While upper extremity injury  risk-reduction programs exist (102),
much of the resear ch has focused on the prevention  of lower
extremity injuries, specifically anterior cruciate ligament (ACL)
injuries. Two examples of structur ed programs designed to reduce
injury risk are Sportsmetric s (33) and PEP (Prevent Injury and
Enhance Performance) (62). While using slightly different foci, each
of these programs introduces exercises and movements shown to
address risk factors for injury and reduce lower extremity injury
rates, especial ly ACL injuries  and ankle sprains (25, 28, 33, 76). In
addition, using eccentric exercise has been shown to dramatical ly
reduce the risk of hamstring injury (74 , 79).
After return to sport, individuals may continue to demonstr ate
deficits in strength, biomech anics, and functional performance (71,
87). Defici ts may often be compared to the contralater al limb (60) or
establ ished normativ e values (19, 38). Side-to-side differences of
less than 10% in strength and functional performance may be
consider ed acceptable (60). The transition between supervised
rehabi litation for an injury and unrestricted activity participation is a
critical time when members of the allied health team need to be in
communication regarding how deficits in strength and performance
will be managed.
1666
FIGURE 23.7 Shoulder external rotator strengthen ing may be used to reduce shoulder
injuries and impr ove shoulder f unction and stabi lity: (a) start posi tion and  (b) end posi tion.
FIGURE 23.8 The sleeper stretch is used to reduce shoulder injuries, improve shoulder
internal r otation, and r educe posterior shoulder tightness;  (a) front view and  (b) top view .
1667
Medical Conditions
Strength and condi tioning professionals must have an understanding
of medical condi tions that may develop from training as well as
preexisting condi tions that may increase the risk of an adverse event
from exercise. Possessing this knowledge is essential for ensuring
safe participation in exercise and appropriate discontinuation
procedur es. Recognizing the early presentation and management
strategies for rhabdom yolysis, sickling from the sickle cell trait, and
temper ature-induced illnesses are a necessary requirement for
training both the athletic and gener al populations.
Rhabdomyolysis
Rhabdomyolysis  is characteriz ed by the breakdown of skeletal
muscle tissue, leading to the release of myoglobin  into the
bloodstr eam. Myoglobin can pose a risk to kidney function,
potential ly causing kidney damage or failure if left untreated. Various
factors can trigger rhabdo myolysis, including trauma, extreme
physical exertion, and muscle compr ession. The severity of
rhabdom yolysis ranges from mild muscle discomf ort to severe, life-
threatening complications (43). Symptoms of rhabdom yolysis may
manifest as severe muscle pain and weakness, dark urine (often
resembl ing cola, properly termed myoglobinuria ), swelling,
tenderness of affected muscl es, alongside fatigue, nausea , vomiting,
and confusion. In severe instances, individuals may experience
dehydration, electr olyte imbalances, and acute kidney injury (43).
If rhabdom yolysis is suspected, immediately discontinue activity,
lie the client down, implement proper hydration protocols, and
closely monitor to ensur e stability while awaiting further medical
assistance (10). Prompt referral to a medical professional is
necessary to pr event mor e serious medical compl ications (10).
1668