# Section 23.3

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 23: Rehabilitation, Reconditioning, and Medical Issues

**Section:** 23.3 -- Tissue Healing

**PDF Pages:** 1649--1658

athletic trainer. Submaximal isometric exercise allows the athlete to
maintain neuromuscular function and improve strength with
movements performed at an intensi ty low enough that the newly
formed collagen fibers are not disrupted. Unfortunately , isometric
strengthening is joint angle specific; that is, strength gains occur
only at the angles used (46). Therefore, if indicated, it may be
appropriate for the athlete to perform isometric exercises at multiple
angles (46). Isokinetic exercise uses equipment that provides
resistance to movement at a given speed (e.g., 60°/s or 120°/s).
Because sport is not performed at a single consistent speed,
isokinetic exercise may be limited in real-world application as a
standalone exercise. Furthermor e, most isokinetic equipment allows
single-joint exercise only, which permi ts concentr ation on a specific
muscle or joint but is not always the most functional method of
strengthening. While isokinetic machines may have a more limited
application in terms of strengthening specificity, these devices may
be of value for providing continuous passiv e motion early in the
post-injury or post-operative phases of healing and can be used to
assess muscle balance or ratios (e.g., quadriceps-to-hamstring
strength r atio).
While isotonic exercise (i.e., concentric and eccentric) involves
movements with constant external resistance, the amount of force
required to move the resistance varies, depending primar ily on joint
angle and the length of each agonist muscle. Isotonic exercise uses
several different forms of resistance, including gravity (i.e., exercises
performed without equipment, with gravitational effects as the only
source of resistance), dumbbells, barbel ls, and weight stack
machines. Concentric and eccentric muscle actions can be used to
increase strength and appropriately stress healing tissues . Eccentric
exercise allows for greater force production and requires less energy
expendi ture compar ed to concentric exercise and has been shown to
promote healing or tissue repair via the concept of
mechanotransduction  (44, 61). Mechanotr ansduction occurs
when tissues are subject to overload, which communicates a
1649
mechanical message from the extracellular to intracellular region of
the tissue. This mechanical message upregulates the cellular DNA,
which in turn stimulates collagen synthesis (44). Loads may be
increased to provide greater challenge as tissue healing progresses.
The speed at which the movement occurs is controlled by the
athlete; movement speed can be a program design variable, with
more acute injuries calling for slower movement and the later
phases of healing better suited to faster, more sport-speci fic
movement.
Neuromuscular control  is the ability of muscles to respond to
sensory feedback to maintain joint stability (85). This sensory
information is referred to as proprioception  and occurs in response
to receptors in the skin, muscles, tendons, ligaments, and the joint
capsule. Proprioception contributes to the consc ious and
unconscious efferent control of postur e, balance, stability, and sense
of position (85). For example, when running on an uneven surface,
cross country runners rely on sensory input (proprioception) from
their lower extremities to adjust to the ground to prevent falls and
injuries. After an injury , neuromuscular control is usually impair ed
due to arthrogenic inhibition , which occurs from swelling within
the joint that causes a reflex inhibi tion of the alpha motor neuron
responsible for muscle activation (22). Specific types of exercises
exist to improve neuromuscu lar control following injury and can be
manipulated through alterations in surface stability, vision, and
speed. Mini-tr ampol ines, balance boards, and stability balls can be
used to create unstable surfaces for upper and lower extremity
training. Athletes can perform common activities such as squats and
push-ups on uneven surfaces to improve neuromuscular control.
Exercises may also be performed with eyes closed, thus removing
visual input, to further challenge balance. Finally, increasing the
speed at which exercises are performed provides additional
challenges to the system. Specifically controlling these  variables
within a controlled environment that is sport or activity specific will
1650
allow the athlete to progress to more challenging exercises in the
next stage of heal ing.
Maturation–Remodeling Phase
The outcome of the repair phase is the replacement of damaged
tissue with collagen fibers. After those fibers are laid down , the body
can begin to remodel and strengthen the new tissue, allowing the
athlete to gr adual ly return to f ull activi ty.
Treatment Goal
The primary goal during the matur ation–r emodel ing phase is to
optimiz e tissue function while transitioning to return to play or
activity. Athletes improve function by continuing and progressing the
exercises performed during the repair phase and by adding more
advanced, sport-speci fic exercises that allow progressive stresses to
be applied to the injured tissue. The athlete can be tempted to do
too much too soon, which may further damage the injured tissues. It
is important to remember that, while there may be less pain with
activity at this point, the injured tissues have not fully healed and
require further attention to achiev e complete recovery (figure 23.3).
Progressive tissue loading allows improved collagen fiber alignment
and fiber hypertr ophy (8, 30). Return-to-pla y or activity decisions
should be based on an understanding of normal tissue healing time
frames as well as a criteria-based progression with predetermined
objectiv es. These objectiv es usually include measur es of range of
motion and strength, functional testing, and patien t-reported
function using establ ished patient -reported outcome forms (1, 57,
100). It is important for the allied health team members to
communicate, have clearly defined roles, and use return-to-pla y
metrics to ensur e a saf e return to pla y.
1651
FIGURE 23.3 Profile of a typical soft-tissue injury response. Pain is often used as a guide
for tissue health. Pain levels (blue line) often decrease well before tissue healing (yellow
line) is complete, which may lead athletes to inappr opriately believe adequate tissue
healing has oc curred (vertical y ellow line) and i t is saf e to r esume f ull activi ty.
Exercise Strategies
Ultimately , as with other aspects of strength and condi tioning,
rehabi litation and recondi tioning exercises must be functional and
must mimic activity demands—that is, reflect specificity. Examples of
functional ly specific training include joint angle–speci fic
strengthening, velocity-speci fic muscle activity, closed kinetic chain
exercises, and exercises designed to further enhance neuromuscular
control. Strengthening should transition from gener al exercises to
sport-speci fic exercises designed to replicate movements common in
given sports. For example, for a basketball guard who sprained an
ankle, rehabi litation exercises may progress from a gener al single-
joint exercise to those more specific to the sport and position (figure
23.4). Specificity of movement speed is another important program
design variable. Strengthening exercises performed during
rehabi litation should also mimic sport speed requirements; that is,
activities that require greater speeds (e.g., sprinting) should include
exercises performed at higher velocities. Using the example in figure
23.4, the exercises progress from the relatively slow and controlled
balance and strength exercises to the faster plyometric and sprinting
1652
exercises. Similarly, consider a sprinter with a hamstring muscle
strain. Whereas initial reconditioning may concentr ate on the
recovery of flexibi lity and strength of the injured muscles, the nature
of this athlete’ s sport necessi tates exercises performed at rapid
speeds during the later phases of rehabi litation and recondi tioning.
Exercise select ion for a sprint er with an improving hamstring muscle
strain might progress from hamstring flexibi lity to eccentric strength
to concentric strength to dynamic stretching and finally to rapid
isotonic strengthening. Exam ples of velocity-speci fic exercise include
manual ly resisted strengthening and plyometric and speed training.
Refer to chapters 19 and 20 for a thorough discussion of plyometric
and speed tr aining, r espectiv ely.
1653
FIGURE 23.4 Sample progression for a basketball player with a goal of returning from an
ankle spr ain. Ex ercises pr ogress from gener al to bask etball speci fic.
The kinetic chain is the collective effort or involvement of two or
more sequential joints to create movement (88). A closed kinetic
chain  exercise is one in which the terminal joint meets with
consider able resistance that prohibits or restrains its free motion
(88); that is, the distal joint segment is stationary (e.g., fixed to the
1654
ground). Lower extremity closed kinetic chain exercises have often
been classified as a more functional form of exercise than open
kinetic chain exercises (2, 94) because most sport-related activities
are performed  with the feet “fixed” to the playing surface. For
example, during the closed kinetic chain squat exercise, the feet are
“fixed” to the floor and essential ly do not move, providing  a base on
which movement occurs (figure 23.5a). Closed kinetic chain
exercises have several advantages, including increased joint stability
and functional movement patterns; during sport activity, joints are
not typically used in isolation but rather work in concert with the
adjacent joints  and surrounding musculatur e. Although closed kinetic
chain exercises are commonly viewed as lower extremity exercises,
closed chain upper extremity exercises exist as well (figure 23.5b)
(57, 100).
1655
FIGURE 23.5  Closed kinetic chain ex ercises:  (a) squat ex ercise and  (b) push-up ex ercise.
An open kinetic chain  exercise uses a combination of
successiv ely arranged joints in which the terminal joint is free to
move; open kinetic chain exercises allow for greater concentr ation
on an isolated joint or muscle (2). An example is the leg (knee)
extension exercise, during which the feet and lower legs are allowed
to move freely (figure 23.6). The leg extension allows greater
concentr ation on the quadric eps at the knee joint; in comparison,
the squat, which also uses the quadriceps muscles and knee joint,
relies on muscl e activity on the hip and ankle joints as well. Although
closed kinetic chain exercises are often viewed as more functional,
1656
most activities involve both closed and open kinetic chain
movements. In sprinting, for example, while one lower extremity is
on the ground (closed kinetic chain), the other is in the air (open
kinetic chain), which means that both types of movement can occur
simultaneously . In some situations, an open chain exercise may
therefore be an equal ly appropriate choice. Some examples of upper
extremity open kinetic chain activities include the biceps curl and
bench pr ess ex ercises.
FIGURE 23.6  Example of an open kinetic chain ex ercise—leg (knee) extension ex ercise.
Exercises designed to improve neuromuscular control, which were
introduced during the repair phase, should be continued and
progressed as appropriate during the matur ation–r emodel ing phase.
Rehabi litation and recondi tioning goals and strategies are
summariz ed in the sidebar .
1657
Rehabilitation and Reconditioning Goals
and Strategies
Although rehabi litation and recondi tioning programs must be individual ized, the
following ar e lists of gener al goals and appr oaches f or each phase.
Inflammatory Response Phase
Prevention of new tissue disruption and prolonged inflammation with the use
of relative rest and passiv e modal ities
Maintenance of function of the cardiorespiratory and surrounding
neuromusculosk eletal systems
No activ e exercise for the injur ed area
Fibroblastic Repair Phase
Prevention of excessiv e muscle atrophy and joint deterior ation of the injured
area
Maintenance of function of the neuromusculosk eletal and cardiorespiratory
systems
Possible exercise options: submaximal isometric, isokinetic, and isotonic
exercise; balance and pr oprioceptiv e training activi ties
Maturation–Remodeling Phase
Optimization of tissue f unction
Progressive loading of the neuromusculosk eletal and cardiorespiratory
systems as indicated
Possible exercise options: joint angle–speci fic strengthening, velocity-speci fic
muscle activity, closed and open kinetic chain exercises, proprioceptiv e
training activi ties
1658