# Section 25.2

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 25: Facility Design, Layout, and Organization

**Section:** 25.2 -- Equipment Selection and Layout

**PDF Pages:** 1746--1760

that any adjacent pool or spa areas are equipped with negativ e
exhaust air flow helps to prevent moistur e and chlorine odor from
escaping into other ar eas of the tr aining f acility (2).
Ventilation and circulation are primary concerns with regard to
facility design and the HVAC system. The HVAC system, a fresh air
exchange system, and ceiling or box fans should provide necessary
ventilation and circulation that are in accordance with ANSI/A SHRAE
62.1 requirements for health clubs and weight rooms (6). Air
systems must provide air circulation at proper levels according to the
needs of specific equipmen t areas and occupant loads (6). For
example, aerobic training areas require a higher circulation  rate than
resistance training spaces (2). Room air should be exchanged a
minimum of 8 to 10 times per hour—optimal ly 12 to 15 times per
hour to prevent odors and stagnant air (5). If fans are used, a
gener al guidel ine is two to four fans for every 1,200 squar e feet (111
m2). Fans help keep the air from feeling stagnant and muggy , which
makes for a bet ter training en vironment.
Sound Systems and Noise Control
While not essential, many facilities have sound systems that help
create a motiv ating training environment conduciv e to hard work.
The two main consider ations for installing a sound system are
speak er volume and placement. The sound volume should be less
than 90 decibels so that athletes can hear instructions and coaching
cues (2). To avoid damage, speak ers should be elevated above the
height of all training equipment. Placing speak ers in the corner
allows sound to project toward the middle of the room so that it is
more evenly distributed. The use of headphones is not
recommended. Headphones can interfere with coaching and
instruction and limit athletes’ awareness of their surroundings in the
case of an emer gency .
Backgr ound noise and excess external noise are other issues to
consider . Such sounds can emanate from sources ranging from the
HVAC system to the people in the next building. In a facility that has
1746
yoga or dance classes, sound-absorbing material should be used in
the floors and walls to prevent music from reaching others in the
facility. Absorbent rubber flooring can be used to reduce noise
caused b y people jumping, running, or dr opping things.
Electrical Service and Devices
A strength and condi tioning facility typical ly requires more outlets
than other buildings. Some outlets may require relatively higher
voltage for more powerf ul equipment, such as stair climbers,
elliptical trainers, and treadm ills. The electrical service also needs to
be properly grounded to protect the system from lightning strikes or
power surges. Ground fault circuit interrupter (GFCI) outlets are also
necessary to ensur e safety in the ev ent of an electrical short (1).
With the increase of technology now being used in weight rooms,
the placement of wall, floor, and elevated power outlets should be
consider ed to limit future issues with devices and power cords once
the facility becomes operational. Specifically, power cords should
never extend into exercise areas, safety spacing, walkways, or
spotter areas. In addition, any equipment and device charging
stations should be in an office or storage area away from weight
room traffic. If televisions will be used in the facility, the use of
elevated outlets and secur ed wall or ceiling mounts are
recommended. Planning ahead for the use of technology is valuable,
especial ly if the intent is to use television monitors or overhead
projectors to communicate work outs and announcements.
Walls and Mirrors
Mirrors can be used for many purposes in a strength and
condi tioning facility. They can be used as a coaching tool if racks and
platforms are placed in the right position, because they provide
immediate visual feedback for improved spatial awareness and
safety (14). Mirrors can also be used to enhance a room
aesthetical ly.
1747
Mirrors should be placed at least 6 inches (15 cm) away from any
equipment (e.g., behind a rack of dumbbel ls) and a minim um of 20
inches (51 cm) above the floor (4). The purpose of the height
guidel ine is to ensur e that weights do not roll, bounce, or slide into
the bottom of the mirror and cause the glass to break. The standar d
weight plate is 18 inches (46 cm) in diameter , giving mirrors a 2-inch
(5 cm) clearance if the plate is dropped near the mirror or leaned
against the w all behind the mirr or (14).
Bumper railings or padding may be useful for places that require
added protection from dama ge, such as walls and mirrors. Railings
are also used in dance and yoga studios so people can hold on for
balance when  necessary . Balance railings should be installed
secur ely with safety in mind and check ed regularly before any
weight -bearing activity. The choice of material and beam structur e
used for constructing walls (e.g., drywall or cinder block) should be
consider ed for properly securing balance railings and other wall
attachments. Also, strength and condi tioning professional s who plan
to program medicine ball throws into a wall should make sure to use
a solid wall, such as cinder block, to pr event damage.
Hydration and Nutrition Spaces in the
Weight Room
Drinking fountains and water bottle refill stations are important
additions to a strength and condi tioning facility. They should be
located away from the training area and should not interrupt traffic
flow. Water stations and nutrition areas are often placed next to the
entrance of the facility or next to the bathrooms and lockers. With
the increased emphasis on nutrition and recovery for athletes,
nutrition areas that include food preparation and appliances, such as
blenders, knives, cutting boards, and refrigeration, are subject to
safe food handl ing requirements. In the United States, such
requirements are governed by the U.S. Food and Drug
Administr ation (22), U.S. Department of Agricul ture (22), and U.S.
Centers for Disease Contr ol and Prevention (CDC) (19), all of which
1748
have policies and recommendations to avoid food poisoning and
food contamination. (See Standar d 9.1 in the NSCA Strength and
Condi tioning Professional Standar ds and Guidel ines for additional
detail on the responsibi lity of strength and condi tioning professionals
related to supplements, er gogenic aids, and drugs [16]. )
Locker and Changing Room Access
Access to locker rooms is a good benefi t within a facility. At
minimum, having a shower located somewher e in the building
ensur es that cleaning up after a workout will be convenient. Good
hygiene is important for preventing the spread of infections and
disease. Although not everyone will use the showers or lockers,
having them available for on-the-go athletes may boost morale and
give them another r eason to work har d during a work out.
Storage Spaces
A strength and condi tioning facility should have a dedicated storage
space to keep items such as extra equipment, cleaning supplies,
facility maintenance tools, or broken equipment. A larger facility with
more equipment requires more storage space than a small facility.
Depending on the layout of the facility, or if it has multiple floors,
multiple storage areas may be best to avoid excessiv e clutter or
injury from equipment not being used. For example, an athlete or
strength and condi tioning professional may injure his or her fingers
while racking and storing weights on a plate tree in a space that is
too narrow and filled with unnecessary equipment accessories.
Additional areas to watch for excessiv e clutter include underneath
dumbbel l storage racks, around shelving units, in suspension training
areas (8), and in corners and other tight spaces. Making sure that
equipment is stored safely and secur ely improves weight room
organization and maintains the longevi ty of the equipment.
In addition to the storage of training equipment, all necessary
emergency equipment should be kept in or near the training facility
to be quickly accessible (16). Such equipment must include a fire
1749
extinguisher , AED, CPR equipment, and a stocked first aid kit.
Additional details about emergency policies and action plans are
presented in chapter 26 .
Other areas to consider related to storage include determining
where athletes will store personal items, such as coats, backpacks,
and water bottles, during training sessions. If no locker room is
available at the facility, designating an area for personal item storage
is important to avoid clutter. The use of cube storage, shelving, or
other functiona l storage solutions can help maintain organizational
flow of the weight r oom.
1750
Arranging Equipment in the Strength
and Conditioning Facility
It is essential to consider spacing requirements when arranging
equipment in the strength and condi tioning facility. A floor plan can
be drawn to help with visual izing how to arrange equipment,
especial ly since each type of equipment and mode of exercise comes
with its own saf ety and ef ficiency r ecommendations.
Equipment Placement
Equipment should be grouped into sections such as a stretching and
warm-up area, agility and plyometrics, free weights, aerobic area,
and resistance  machines. Ideally, free weights and racks should be
organized along the wall, and there should be walkways between the
free weights and machines (1). Racks and machines also can be
placed in rows with the back of the equipment facing each other.
This allows for improved flow through the weight room, preventing
congestion and maximizing usage space.
Using line of sight as a guideline, shorter equipment is better
placed in the middle of the room so that strength and conditioning
professionals and staff can easily see across the facility. Planning
ahead and organizing the equipment so it can be used as a circuit or
exercise pairin g will also help with traffic flow. Tall machi nes should
be bol ted to the floor , a column, or the w all to pr event tipping o ver.
Cardiovascular machines should be in their own section and
should be lined up and organized such that the treadmi lls, elliptical
trainers, stair climbers, ski trainers, rowers, and bikes are grouped
together . Similarly, dedicated exercise and performance testing
devices should be in their own section and grouped to ensur e the
consistent administr ation, validity, and reliability of testing
procedur es. Keep in mind that most machines requiring electrici ty
will have to be along a wall unless electrical outlets are available in
the floor or on a column. Equipment should also be placed away
1751
from the walkway to minimiz e the chances of someone tripping over
it or on associated electrical cor ds.
Racks, barbel ls, and dumbbel ls should have a minimum of 3 feet
(0.9 m) of space between equipment to allow for movement without
danger to the athlete or spotter. If a spotter or multiple spotters are
needed (e.g., on a rack), providing additional space  may be
required.
Traffic Flow
Traffic flow is heavily influenced by equipment placement. Many
facilities are one big room, and walkways can be created via
arrangement of the equipment. As mentioned, most racks or
machines are best placed lined up in a row running the length of the
facility. This usually creates two or three main walkways that should
be 5 to 7 feet (1.5-2.1 m) wide (2, 3, 13). For safety, all individuals
in the training facility should have clear access to an exit at all times.
Ensuring proper equipment and walkway spacing is important for
allowing clearance to move freely throughout the facility and for
ADA-required wheelchair ac cess (3, 13).
Weight Room Pillars and Building
Structures
When placing equipment in facilities that contain supporting
structur e, such as weight room pillars, columns, or other weight
room obstructions, logistical planning for training sessions and safety
factors should be prioritized. Due to the large size of many strength
and condi tioning facilities, the inclusion of weight -supp orting and
other building structur es may be unavoidable. Strategical ly placing
training equipment with consider ation of any vertical weight room
pillars or horizontal structu ral beams and designatin g specific
exercise and storage areas within the facility layout considering
proximity to building structur es minimiz e facility congestion and will
improve training session organization. Adhering to the safety spacing
1752
and equipment guidel ines in this chapter around building structur es
will impr ove the f unctional ity and tr affic flow of the f acility.
Safety, function, and traffic flow are top priorities when
deciding on the placement of equipment in a facility.
Stretching and Warm-Up Area
A stretching and warm-up area is an open area with soft tissue
instruments, mats, or elastic bands. This area may include foam
rollers and other tissue rolling tools (e.g., PVC pipes, and lacrosse,
tennis, golf, or softbal l balls) and jump ropes. Mats can be used so
that athletes do not have to lie on a hard floor, but this is not
necessary .
Circuit Training Area
A circuit training area is typical ly a space with machines lined up or
grouped together to make it easy for people to switch from one
machine to the next. Grouping the machines can be done in several
ways. Examples of different groupings include upper body and lower
body, pushing actions and pulling actions, and various body part
groupings. In many facilities, injured athletes use the circuit
machines to exercise the body parts that are still healthy. Ease of
access betwee n machines should be kept in mind so that injured
athletes can move freely. Stationary circuit training machines should
be at least 30 inches (76 cm) (3), preferably 36 inches (91 cm),
away from each other to provide a wide enough area and some
extra space for safety. Safety spacing in the weight room is gener ally
referred to as a safety cushion .
Free W eights
Free weight equipment includes dumbbel ls, barbel ls, benches,
kettlebel ls, farmer ’s walk handles, hexagonal bars, squat racks, and
any other equipment necessary to use these items. Kettlebel ls can
be lined up neatly under a dumbbel l rack or in their own section.
1753
Since most activities with a kettlebel l are dynamic and require space
to complete a variety of movements, this section should be large
enough to accommodate both the exercises being performed and
the number of athletes using the space simul taneously .
Weightlifting Area
A weightl ifting area gener ally contains racks with platforms or a
platform standing alone. It could also be an open area where
weightl ifting is performed without a platform. This is typical ly done
on a rubber floor with a concr ete foundation. To keep things
organized, weight trees or racks and bar holders can be used when
the equipment is not in use.
Racks and platforms should have enough room between them
that if someone were to fall, people nearb y would not be injured.
Weightl ifting racks should be bolted to the floor to ensur e that they
do not move when in use. If a rack is portable, it should  be moved
to a designated stor age ar ea when not in use.
Exercise and Performance Testing Spaces
Exercise testing equipment should be in their own section or
dedicated space. Exercise testing spaces are where equipment is
grouped together for exercise testing sessions. This equipment may
consist of force plates, isometric mid-thigh pulling racks, exercise
testing bikes and treadmi lls, testing and monitoring device charging
stations, and associated computer equipment. Ensuring a consistent
location for exercise testing within the training facility is optimal for
ensuring the v alidity and r eliability of ex ercise testing.
It is also important to consid er safety in implementing technology
devices that are specifically designed for integr ation into free weight
and weightlifting areas. Such equipment includes rack-mounted
training feedback tablets, barbel l attachments, linear position
transducers, accelerometers, and mounted camer a systems. As a
gener al rule, weight room technology should be set up and
administer ed in a way that does not impede planned safety space
1754
(i.e., safety cushion) or interfere with the position of the spotters.
Additional consider ations should be made for the placement of
clocks and television monitors that contain pertinent information to
ensur e optimal visibi lity throughout the tr aining session.
Aerobic Area
The aerobic area is where the cardiovascular training equipment is
grouped together . This equipment consists of stationar y bicycles,
stair climbers, elliptical trainers, treadmi lls, rowers, and so on. A
gener al guidel ine is to allocate approximately 40 to 60 squar e feet
(3.7-5.6 m2) of floor space  per piece of equipment (2). Specific floor
space requirements for aerobic equipment and the recommended
space between pieces of equipment are provided in table 25.1.
These requirements outline the amount of space neede d for each
piece of equipment, along with the required amount of space to
allow for room to move and prevent accidents caused by falling into
equipment. Within aerobic training areas it is important that there is
adequate spacing around and behind all continuous-motio n exercise
equipment (e.g., treadmi lls, elliptical trainers, bikes, ski trainers, and
rowers) (2).
TABLE 25.1  Aerobic Equipment Space Estimates
Equipment Minimum space needed
Bike (upright) 30 ft2 (2.8 m2)
Bike (recumbent) 38 ft2 (3.5 m2)
Elliptical tr ainer 47 ft2 (4.4 m2)
Ski trainer 31 ft2 (2.9 m2)
Stair cl imber 35 ft2 (3.3 m2)
Rower 48 ft2 (4.5 m2)
Adapted by permission from B. Kroll, “Structur al and Functional Consider ations in
Designing the Facility: Part I,” National Strength and Condi tioning Association Journal  13,
no. 1 (1991): 51-58, with updates made to comply with ADA Standar ds for Accessible
Design (Uni ted States Department of Justice, 2010), 104-116, 224-252.
1755
Equipment Minimum space needed
Treadmi ll 53 ft2 (4.9 m2)
Adapted by permission from B. Kroll, “Structur al and Functional Consider ations in
Designing the Facility: Part I,” National Strength and Condi tioning Association Journal  13,
no. 1 (1991): 51-58, with updates made to comply with ADA Standar ds for Accessible
Design (Uni ted States Department of Justice, 2010), 104-116, 224-252.
Indoor Sprint Track and Turf Lanes
Indoor track and turf lanes are beneficial for incorpor ating
plyometric, speed, and agility training. These surfaces also can be
used to implement warm-up and dynamic movement programs with
athletes. When  track and turf lanes are incorpor ated within training
facilities, in proximity to other strength and condi tioning equipment,
special consider ations should be taken to enhance safety and reduce
the risk of injury and l iability concerns.
Based on the specific needs and training goals, sideline, distance,
and running lane markings should be consider ed to optimiz e session
management and athlete instruction. Track and turf lanes should
remain clear of unnecessary equipment to avoid tripping and other
injury . Conside ring how many athletes will be using the turf and
track lanes simultaneously is essential to identi fying space
requirements.
The length of track and turf lanes will determine the ability to
administer certain assessments. For example, a 20-meter (22 yd)
track lane would not be suitable to perform the Yo-Yo intermi ttent
recovery test due to the added 5 meters (5.5 yd) of length required
for jogging recovery betwee n test interv als. Also, the amount of
space required at the ends of the track or turf lanes to allow for
deceler ation is an important safety consider ation. Deter mining the
amount of space needed to deceler ate will depend on the
demogr aphic and skill level of those being trained. While it is
common for padding to be installed on back-end walls to prevent
injury , it is best to avoid unnecessary collisions with an adequate
space al lowance.
1756
Suspension Training Equipment
Suspension training equipment  refers to commer cially available ring,
handle, or strap setups (8). They are most often used for
bodyweight training focusing  on upper body, lower body, and core.
The straps of a suspension training unit can be anchor ed
independent of each other (e.g., gymnastics ring) or connected by a
common anchor (e.g., eyelet and carabiner). Specific usage should
be in accordance with setup and loading guidel ines determined by
the equipment manuf acturer.
Safe and effective suspension training requires a stable
attachment point, level nonskid flooring, open space free of
obstacles, and handles that are easy to grip (e.g., not worn or
slippery) (8). Because suspension training equipment must be
attached to a fixed structur e (e.g., load-bearing wall mount, bolted
rack, or rig frame), it is suggested that the strength and conditioning
professional regularly checks the integri ty of the anchor point before
each use. Ideally, the anchor point should be between 7 to 9 feet
(2.1-2. 7 m) above the floor. Further , suspension training equipment
should not be mounted in or near doorw ays to prevent blocking
emergency exits and hindering access to storage areas, cleaning
closets, lock er rooms, and r estrooms.
All accessories  used to mount suspension training equipment
should be load bearing. As a gener al rule, any carabiner and snap
hook used for exercise purposes should be load-r ated for physical
activity and include a secondary screw-locking mechanism to prevent
risks of falls or drops causing a potential injury . In the United States,
carabiners used for fall protection must meet OSHA standar ds, which
specify a minimum tensile (breaking) strength of 5,000 lbs (22kN)
(17). Outside of the United States, Conformité Européen ne (CE) or
other third-part y rating requirements should be referenced to select
connectors wi th appr opriate load r atings f or saf ety.
Table 25.2 summa rizes the space needs for a range of exercise
types. Note that there are unique formulas that are specific to each
1757
type with several example calculations, including those based on
metric appr oximations.
TABLE 25.2  Calculations for Space Needs
Exercise
typeExamples of
exercises Formulas and examples
Prone and
supine
exercises wi th
barBench pr ess;
lying triceps
extension;
hip thrustFormula:  DEPTH: actual weight bench lengtha (6-8 ft
[1.8-2.4 m]) + a saf ety cushion of 3 ft (0.9 m)  multiplied
by WIDTH: actual bar length (4-7 ft [1.2-2.1 m]) + a
double- wide saf ety cushion of 6 ft (1.8 m)
Example 1:  If using a 6 ft long weight bench and a 7 ft
Olympic bar f or the bench pr ess ex ercise: DEPTH: (6 ft
[bench] + 3 ft [saf ety cushion])  × WIDTH: (7 ft [bar] + 6
ft [double- wide saf ety cushion]) = 117 ft2
Example 2 (metric approximations):  If using a 2 m
long weight bench and a 1 m long bar f or the lying triceps
extension ex ercise: DEPTH: (2 m [bench] + 1 m [saf ety
cushion])  × WIDTH: (1 m [bar] + 2 m [double- wide saf ety
cushion]) = 9 m2
Standing
exercisesBiceps curl;
upright r owFormula:  DEPTH: a suggested user space of 2 ft (0.6 m)
for a standing ex ercise + a saf ety cushion of 3 ft (0.9 m)
multiplied by WIDTH: actual bar lengthb (4-7 ft [1.2-2.1
m]) + a double- wide saf ety cushion of 6 ft (1.8 m)
Example 1:  If using a 4 ft curl bar f or the biceps curl
exercise: DEPTH: (2 ft [user space] + 3 ft [saf ety
cushion])  × WIDTH: (4 ft [bar] + 6 ft [double- wide saf ety
cushion]) = 50 ft2
Example 2 (metric approximations):  If using a 2 m
bar for the upright r ow ex ercise: DEPTH: (1 m [user
space] + 1 m [saf ety cushion])  × WIDTH: (2 m [bar] + 2
m [double- wide saf ety cushion]) = 8 m2
Standing
exercises
from a r ackBack squat;
shoulder
pressFormula:  DEPTH: a suggested user space of 8-10 ft (2.4-
3.0 m) f or a standing ex ercise (f rom a r ack) multiplied by
WIDTH: actual bar length (5-7 ft [1.5-2.1 m]) + a double-
wide saf ety cushion of 6 ft (1.8 m)
Example 1:  If using a 7 ft Olympic bar f or the back squat
exercise: DEPTH: (10 ft [user space])  × WIDTH: (7 ft [bar]
1758
Exercise
typeExamples of
exercises Formulas and examples
+ 6 ft [double- wide saf ety cushion]) = 130 ft2
Example 2 (metric approximations):  If using a 2 m
Olympic bar f or the shoulder pr ess ex ercise: DEPTH: (3 m
[user space])  × WIDTH: (2 m [bar] + 2 m [double- wide
safety cushion]) = 12 m2
Weightl ifting
exercisesPower clean;
power snatchFormula (on inlaid rubber flooring):  DEPTH: a
suggested user space of 8-10 ft (2.4-3.0 m) f or a
weightl ifting ex ercise multiplied by WIDTH: actual bar
length (6-7 ft [1.8-2.1 m]) + a double- wide saf ety cushion
of 6 ft (1.8 m)
Formula (on an elevated wood platform):  DEPTH:
lifting platf orm length (t ypical ly 8 ft [2.4 m]) + a saf ety
cushion of 3 ft (0.9 m)  multiplied by WIDTH: lifting
platform width (t ypical ly 8 ft [2.4 m]) + a double- wide
safety cushion of 6 ft (1.8 m)
Example 1 (on inlaid rubber flooring):  DEPTH: (10 ft
[user space])  × WIDTH: (7 ft [bar] + 6 ft [double- wide
safety cushion]) = 130 ft2
Example 2 (on an elevated wood platform; metric
approximations):
DEPTH: (2.5 m [platf orm length] + 1 m [saf ety cushion])
× WIDTH: (2.5 m [platf orm width] + 2 m [double- wide
safety cushion]) ≈ 16 m2
Landmine
exercisesLandmine
squat; hal f-
kneeling
landmine
pressFormula:  The minimum space need is based on the ar ea
(A) of a cir cle (A = π  × r2): The r adius (r) of the cir cle is
comprised of the actual bar length (5-7 ft [1.5-2.1 m]) + a
suggested user space of 2 ft (0.6 m) f or a landmine
exercise + a saf ety cushion of 3 ft (0.9 m). A minimum of
90 degr ees of mo vement is r equired for the r ange of
motion at the user end of the bar f or a landmine ex ercise;
90 degr ees is one-quarter of a 360-degr ee cir cle. Thus, the
formula is (π  × [actual bar length + user space + saf ety
cushion]2) divided b y 4. (Use 3.14 f or the v alue of  π.)
Example 1:  If using a 7 ft Olympic bar f or the landmine
squat ex ercise: (π  × [7 ft {bar} + 2 ft {user space} + 3 ft
{safety cushion}]2) ÷ 4 ≈ 113 ft2
1759
Exercise
typeExamples of
exercises Formulas and examples
Example 2 (metric approximations):  If using a 2 m
Olympic bar f or the hal f-kneel ing landmine pr ess ex ercise:
(π × [2 m {bar} + 1 m {user space} + 1 m {saf ety
cushion}]2) ÷ 4 ≈ 12.5 m2
Suspension
training
exercisesSuspension
row; foot-
elevated
knee tuckFormula:  DEPTH: actual distance of the f oot posi tion (the
farthest f oot posi tion if the f eet ar e stagger ed) from the
anchor point of the suspension str ap (measur e out f rom a
spot on the gr ound dir ectly under the anchor point) + the
athlete’ s height + a saf ety cushion of 3 ft (0.9 m)
multiplied by WID TH: a suggested user space of 2 ft (0.6
m) for a suspension ex ercise + a double- wide saf ety
cushion of 6 ft (1.8 m)
Example 1 (angled use):  If a 6 ft tal l athlete is doing an
angled suspension ex ercise (e.g. , a suspension r ow) wi th
both f eet posi tioned 3 ft f rom the suspension str ap anchor
point: DEPTH: (3 ft [distance out f rom under the anchor
point] + 6 ft [athlete’ s height] + 3 ft [perimeter w alkway
safety cushion])  × WIDTH: (2 ft [user space] + 6 ft [saf ety
cushion]) = 96 ft2
Example 2 (vertical or perpendicular use; metric
approximations):  If a 1.6 m tal l athlete is doing a pr one
suspension ex ercise (e.g. , a foot-elevated knee tuck) wi th
the feet in the str aps dir ectly below the anchor point:
DEPTH: (0 m [distance out f rom under the anchor point] +
1.6 m [athlete height] + 1 m [saf ety cushion])  × WIDTH:
(1 m [user space] + 2 m [saf ety cushion]) ≈ 8 m2
aFor prone and supine ground-based barbel l exercises with no bench, use the athlete’ s
height f or the DEPTH.
bFor dumb bell and kettlebel l exercises (i.e., standing exercises without a bar), use a user
space of 2 ft (0.6 m) f or the WID TH.
Organizing a facility begins with arranging the equipment in a
safe, functional space. The guidel ines in this chapter provide the
tools necessary to properly arrange the equipment. Taking a blank
floor plan of the facility and sketching the equipment arrangement
on the blank plan will help with equipment placement. Figures 25.3
and 25.4 on pages 812 and 813, respectively, show example s of
1760