# Chapter 25: Facility Design, Layout, and Organization

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

**PDF Pages:** 1727--1774

CHAPTER  25
FACILITY DESIGN, LAYOUT,
AND ORGANIZATION
Ryan Metzger, MS, Ryan Fowler, MS, and Eric L.
McMahon, MEd
The autho rs would like to acknowledge the significant contributions of Andrea Hudy,
Michael Gr eenwood, and Lori Gr eenwood to this chapter .
After completing this chapter, you will be able to
identi fy the aspects and phases of new str ength and
condi tioning f acility design;
identi fy the aspects of updating or r enovating an existing
strength and condi tioning f acility and tr ansitioning an existing
building or space f or str ength and condi tioning use;
explain how to assess the needs of an athletic pr ogram to
design a f acility that is wel l suited to these needs, including the
planning of tr aining spaces to ac commodate v arious siz e
groups of athletes and coaches;
explain how to design speci fic facility features, including
supervision location, ac cess, cei ling height, flooring,
environmental f actors, electrical service, mirr ors, and stor age;
explain how to arr ange equipment in or ganized groups,
creating bet ter traffic flow and enhancing saf ety throughout the
facility; and
1727
explain the maintenance and cleaning needs f or the surf aces
and equipment in a str ength and condi tioning f acility.
Organizing the construction and design of a strength and
condi tioning facility requires a well-thought -out plan created by a
commi ttee of experienced professionals. This chapter provides
information on the different phases of planning a new facility, along
with details about facility design, organization, and equipment
maintenance. The chapter also outlines the phases of construction or
remodel ing of a facility. The design should account for the needs of
various stakeholders (e.g., athletes, staff, administr ators) for the
layout to be most ef ficient.
1728
Genera l Aspects of New Facility Design
Building a new facility takes significant time and planning. One of
the first things to do is assem ble a commi ttee of professionals. The
commi ttee should consist of a builder, architect, designers, lawyers,
financial departments, and people who will be involved in using the
facility. At least one strength and condi tioning professional, or other
expert who will be working in the facility, should be included in the
commi ttee to provide a persp ective that will help maximiz e the utility
and safety of the space. This commi ttee will assist with the facility
design as well as consider economic factors of openi ng a new
facility. One of the main challenges in designing a strength and
condi tioning facility is tailoring the facility to the intended audience.
Figure 25.1 outlines the four phases of designing a new facility,
along wi th the main objectiv es for each phase.
FIGURE 25.1  Phases and objectiv es of designing a new f acility.
Predesign Phase
The predesign phase is the first step in building a new facility. This
phase should consist of a needs analysis, a feasibi lity study, and
master plan formation. At the end of the predesign  phase, a
reputable architect should be hired—likely through a bid process—
and begin dev eloping a blueprint f or the f acility.
The needs analysis  is the step when the designers and experts
collaborate to determine the needs of the strength and condi tioning
program (10). Examples of questions are “How much open space do
1729
you need?” and “What equipment needs to fit into the allotted
space?” The needs analysis should be consistent with the specific
programming needs of the strength and condi tioning and athletic
departments. For example, if a strength and condi tioning
professional regularly incorpor ates jump testing on force plates
during weight room sessions,  an area needs to be set aside for that
activity. For those serving on the design commi ttee, the needs
analysis should convey an effective environment to properly
implement the intended program. While site, budget, construction,
and other limitations may require a certain level of flexib ility as the
project progresses, safety consider ations for facility users should not
be jeopar dized (2-7 , 9-17 , 19-22).
The second part of the predesign phase is called a feasibility
study . This process should analyz e strengths, weaknesses,
opportuni ties, and threats (known as a SWOT analysis ) (10). The
goal of the feasibility study is to ensur e that the financial investment
will yield a viable and sustainable return. The feasibi lity study should
also evaluate the location, strengths and weaknesses of any
proposed ideas, and the growth potential for strength and
condi tioning and related programs within the department. The
potential opportuni ties and competi tion threats also need to be
consider ed. This includes market evaluation to identi fy the best
opportuni ty to train athletes most efficiently , as well as analyzing the
target market and growth potential of competing facilities. In the
collegiate environment, this may include comparisons to other
facilities in the athletic conference or be related to athlete recruiting
goals. The aim of the feasibility study is to help determ ine if the
facility will have an opportuni ty for success against competing
programs and businesses.
The master plan is the gener al plan for all phases of the new
facility. The master plan should include the building and construction
plan, facility design, budget information, and an operational plan to
act on once the facility is completed (10). The operational plan
should consist of short-term and long-term goals that will enhance
1730
the success of the facility both in the near term and in the future.
The operational plan should  also include staff development and a
plan f or the hiring pr ocess.
Hiring an architect is the final step of the predesign phase.
Selecting an architect is crucial for meeting administr ation and
department goals. It is important to select from a list of architects
who have a positive reputation based on previous work. If possible,
it is best to choose an architect who has had previous experience in
the strength and condi tionin g industry . The architect will likely be
hired through a bid process, meaning that the architect who is hired
is often the one who subm its the lowest price. Bid plans require
efficient use of resour ces so that the money is spent on what is most
useful for the users of the f acility.
Design Phase
The design phase  is the second phase in the process of building a
new facility. In the design phase, ideas from the commi ttee come
together with regard to the structur e and design eleme nts of the
facility. It is extremely important to plan around the flow of the
facility while adhering to all relevant regulations and codes. Federal,
state, and city codes are often highly specific about aspects of the
design. City planning departments can provide the local guidel ines
and appl icable codes f or constructing a f acility.
The first step in the design phase is finalizing the design
commi ttee. To reiterate, the commi ttee should include strength and
condi tioning and other athletic department professionals with
experience in facility planning and design. This is also the phase
when the designers need to work closely with the architect to
produce a blueprint of the f acility.
The blueprint and design need to consider the equipment
specifications. This will help with the flow of the facility and will
influence how effectively people can move from one area of the
facility to another once it is operational. Traffic flow is one of the
most important aspects of designing the facility. Creating easy
1731
access for people will have the greatest effect on the function and
safety of the facility when multiple groups of athletes are present at
the same time. The flow of traffic should also allow coaches or
supervisors to have a clear view of the entire floor. The locations of
any structur al pillars, columns, or other obstructions must be
consider ed in the planning of equipment spaces to account for traffic
flow and ac cess to emer gency exi ts.
Construction Phase
The construction phase  is the period of time from the beginning
of building the facility until completion. This is usually the longest
phase of the process. During construction, the commi ttee needs to
continual ly refer to the master plan to ensur e that the project is on
track with regard to the established goals and design. Keeping the
project on track in relation to the deadl ine must also become a
priority. Delays in construction can add significant financial strain.
Having access to legal counsel is beneficial to making sure that
construction deadl ines are met and extra expenses and legal action
are avoided.
Preoperation Phase
The preoperation phase  consists of the final steps before the
facility can open. These steps include finishing the interior decor
(note that appear ance can greatly enhance the experience  of users),
aesthetic consider ations to support athlete recruiting or membership
enrollment, and hiring a staff of qualified professionals. The staff
should have at least the minimum required certifications and
education. For example, the National Collegiate Athletic Association
enforces regulations that require strength and conditioning
professionals to be certified by a national ly accredited organization.
In addition, many professional sport leagues and tactical positions
mandate that a strength and condi tioning professional is a Certified
Strength and Condi tioning Special ist (CSCS) through the National
Strength and Condi tioning Association (NSCA). Finding hardworking,
1732
knowledgeable, loyal, and trustworth y emplo yees is crucial to
running a successful strength and condi tioning program. During the
preoper ation phase, it is important to include a plan for staff
development as well. This could vary from semiannual workshops to
weekly staf f meetings.
During the preoper ation phase it is vital to create a plan that will
make opening the facility easy. For example, duties such as cleaning
and maintenance should be delegated to the staff on a weekly basis.
This is easier to do when a cleaning and maintenance schedule has
been cr eated and is f ollowed as soon as the f acility is oper ating.
Also during preoper ation, a plan for administr ative and clerical
duties should be created to organize work related to matters such as
liability insurance, schedul ing, and budgeting. Details, such as
choosing a schedul ing softw are package, installing an athlete
management system, and delegating clerical duties, should be
accounted f or bef ore the f acility opens.
1733
Existing Strength and Conditioning
Facilities
Modifying an existing strength and condi tioning facility is similar to
designing a new facility, without the process of building from the
ground up. A design commi ttee can also be formed for renovating an
existing facility, but members such as a builder and architect may
not be necessary . An existin g facility may also use different hiring
processes. Sometimes strength and condi tioning professionals
continue to work in the same facility regardless of a change of
ownership or management. However, there should still be a focus on
standar ds, education, professionalism, and staff developm ent. Figure
25.2 outlines the main steps in modi fying an existing f acility.
FIGURE 25.2  Steps in modi fying an existing f acility.
The strengt h and conditioning professional should
assess existing equipment based on the current and
future needs of everyone who uses the facility.
1734
Satellite Training Facilities
It has become common in recent years for college and professional
sport organizations to add alternativ e and sport-speci fic satellite
training facilities to accommodate the needs of growing strength and
condi tioning departments. Other examples of this include providing a
strength and condi tioning facility for visiting team use, as is
mandated by some professional sport leagues, or designing a studio
space for individual ized or small group training sessions. Special
attention should be given when planning satellite training facilities,
especial ly if existing, dated, or nontraining spaces are being
converted f or str ength and condi tioning use.
Satellite training facilities may benefi t from smaller pieces of
equipment based on the size of the space available (e.g., half rack
vs. full rack). In small facilities, it can be beneficial to install
multipurpose pieces of equipment rather than equipment with a
single function (9). A satellite training facility that does not have
dedicated walkways separ ating the equipment areas should be set
up with equipment bolted and secur ed around the perimeter . The
center of the room should remain open for transitions between
training stations while allowing unimpeded access to emergency
exits. As a rule, equipment and safety spacing should  never be
compr omised due to limited space. In accordance with the NSCA
Strength and Condi tioning Professional Standar ds and Guidel ines
(16), and as explained in this chapter , a minimally compliant
facility  must be in agreement with mandated building codes and
regulations, including accessibi lity (i.e., wheelchair access and ADA
compl iance), HVAC, electrical, lighting, flooring, storage, squar e
footage, safety spaces, and overhead clearance and must possess
well-maintained equipment and surf aces.
1735
Outdoor Training Spaces
Weight room adjacent or satellite outdoor training spaces have
become more common in geogr aphical ly moder ate climates. In
addition, the global COVID-19 pandemic created increased
awareness among strength and condi tioning professionals for the
benefi t of social distancing, including the use of open- air outdoor
training spaces for enhanced ventilation (15). There are also
scenarios when schedul ing or programming can be improved by
having strength and condi tioning equipment available near sport or
practice facilities that do not have a dedicated weight room space.
While environmental factors, like weather , must always be
consider ed for athlete safety, this section provides recommendations
for the safe use of strength and condi tioning equipment in outdoor
training ar eas.
Outdoor training spaces may include multipurpose training lockers
or pods and be located next to a game or practice field (e.g., grass
or artificial turf) or in proximity to the weight room (e.g., via garage
door access). Outdoor training spaces may be for seasonal or year-
round use depending on climate. Important consider ations include
ensuring adequ ate space for strength and condi tioning activity to be
performed safely and that standar ds for equipment, safety spacing,
and walkways are clear. Outdoor training surfaces must offer proper
traction for athletic activity and should not be wet or damp from
recent storms. Ground surface temper atures should  also be
consider ed to avoid injury due to excessiv e heat or burns (e.g.,
artificial turf may have higher temper atures than surrounding
surfaces). Additional conside rations should be placed on ensuring
appropriate athletic footwear and attire for strength and condi tioning
sessions held outdoors.
Similar to indoor training spaces, outdoor training spaces should
have a posted emergency action plan that is understood by staff and
athletes. If training equipmen t is to be transported outsid e daily for
use, it is advisable for the coaching staff to make this task more
1736
ergonomic by using a dolly, cart, or wagon with sturdy wheels. All
strength and condi tioning equipment should be inspected  regularly ,
especial ly if used outdoors, because being exposed to the elements
can ac celerate wear .
1737
Assessing Athletic Program Needs
One of the more important consider ations in building a strength and
condi tioning facility is the needs and requirements of the athletes
and athletic program. The number of athletes, coaching
philosophies, athlete ages and experience levels, schedules and
availability, and equipment factors can affect the design of the
facility (12). When it is time to evaluate such needs, the facility
designers should be able to answer these questions:
How many athletes will use the facility? This is an important
consider ation because the facility size will be greatly
influenced by the number of athletes using the facility at the
same time (i.e., at peak usage) and the total number who use
it per day, week, and season. The number of athletes will also
affect the schedul ing and flow of the facility if two or more
groups are training simultaneously. Based on regulations such
as fire codes or other occupational health and safety
regulations, the city planning departments will specify the
maximum room capaci ty. In addition to the number of athletes
training, it is also essential to consider staffing and
supervision. The number of athletes being trained
simultaneously will affect the number of strength and
condi tioning professionals required to safely and effectively
monitor the tr aining session (16).
What are the training goals for the athletes, coaches, and
administr ation?  Training goals will directly affect equipment
selection for the facility. For example, if a strength and
condi tioning professional wants athletes to focus on
plyometrics and agility, the facility will need an area (turf or
field) designated for this purpose. The strength and
condi tioning professional should also use collective training
goals of the various stakeholders as a guidel ine for ordering
equipment. If resistance training is to be programmed, racks
1738
and platforms are more space efficient compar ed to bench or
incline bench pr ess setups that serv e only one purpose.
What are the demogr aphics of the athletes?  The demogr aphics
of the users are important when determining the equipment
needs of the facility. Are the users primari ly older, younger,
male, female, middle school, high school, college, or
professional? A facility with primari ly older populations may
not need as much free weigh t equipment as it does machines.
In a collegiate or team environment, use of the equipment
may be more efficient if it is grouped into sections so that
multiple groups can work out simultaneously without
interference.
What will the training experience of the athletes be like?
Answering this question will help the strength and condi tioning
professional devise training plans, which in turn will dictate the
equipment needed. Training will vary according to the
experience of the athlete. Athletes with no previous resistance
training experi ence may do more bodyweight exercises than
advanced athletes, who may do more weightl ifting. It is also
important to assess whether needs will change over time and
whether equipment requirements will vary depending on the
season.
How will training sessions be scheduled?  The schedul ing of
athletes or groups is one of the more difficult aspects of
running a facility. The numb er of people on staff, the layout,
and the design  of the facility can all be affected by the training
schedule. If more than one group will be using the facility at
one time, it would make sense to divide the facility into
sections so the amount of overlap is limited. Ideally, training
sessions should be scheduled throughout the day to avoid
capaci ty issues during the busiest or most popular times. This
will help maint ain suggested staff-to-athlete ratios and ensure
that enough equipment is available. (See chapter 26 for
additional detai ls.)
1739
What technology is needed to administer training as intended?
Planning for technology is important to account for the
continued growth of the program. A strong Wi-Fi or Bluetooth
connection may be required if the intent is to deliver strength
and condi tioning programs using technology devices, such as
tablets, TV monitors, or cell phone apps. Ensuring access to a
strong cellular signal can provide an additional layer of safety
in case of an emergency . Additional ly, exercise testing and
monitoring equipment may require dedicated space to be
operated during training sessions and stored secur ely between
uses. This includes specific exercise testing devices, athlete
monitoring sensors, and accessories that may require special
cleaning, char ging, and maintenance.
What equipment needs to be repaired or modified? No
equipment in a facility should  have issues such as holes, cuts,
or missing pieces. If a cable is frayed or damaged, discontinue
using the cable column until the cable is replaced. All existing
equipment should be repaired or replaced if broken. Existing
equipment should be repaired promptly or should be sold to
provide funds for new equip ment. In some cases, a piece of
equipment is in good repair but needs an accessory for an
upgrade. For example, cable columns may require new
attachments to be f ully functional.
Once all of these questions are answer ed, the process of
designing the facility will be much easier . Ideally, the facility
designers should have a solution for every problem; this allows for
an optimal training environment. In reality, howev er, budget and
space limitations often stand  in the way. It is important to focus on
what will affect the facility the most and to design from there. For
example, not having enough space will have a larger impact on the
training environment and schedul ing than not having enough of a
special ized piece of equipmen t. The recommended minimu m amount
of space is 100 squar e feet (9.3 m2) per individua l, including all
1740
athletes, strength and condi tioning professionals, and any additional
staff (e.g. , athletic tr ainers) or persons pr esent (16).
1741
Designing the Strength and
Conditioning Facility
Before arranging and positioning equipment, one must consider the
design of the strength and condi tioning facility, wheth er new or
existing. The strength and condi tioning professional should pay
particular attention to facility location and access, structur al and
functional considerations, environmental factors, and safety and
supervision.
Location
The strength and condi tionin g facility ideally should be located on
the ground floor away from offices and classr ooms. This will prevent
interruptions elsewher e in the building that are caused by dropped
weights, music, or other noises common to strength and
condi tioning facilities. If the facility is not located on the ground
floor, the floor must be stable enough to support heavy equipment
and equipment  that is dropped. The load-bearing capaci ty should be
at least 100 f oot-pounds per squar e foot (4 .8 kN/m2) (7).
Supervision Location
An office area for supervision should be in a central location with a
clear line of sight and windo ws or mirrors providing the opportuni ty
to look out and see everyone, including individuals and groups
entering or exiting the room. One option is to place the office at an
elevation o ver the floor of the weight r oom f or bet ter viewing.
Access
Every facility should be accessible to people with disabi lities, with
either a ramp or a wheelchair lift for any change in height exceeding
0.5 inches (1.3 cm). A ramp should run 12 inches for every 1-inch
rise (30.5 cm run for every 2.5 cm rise) with a landing at the top
and bottom (3), and stairs should have a rough strip on the edge to
1742
help prevent anyone from falling. Another option for persons with
disabi lities is a mechanical l ift or an elev ator.
Every facility should have at least one phone that is accessible to
persons in wheelchairs. This compl ies with the Americans With
Disabi lities Act (3); it also provides safety in the event of an
emergency if the only person who can help is in a wheelchair . The
phone should be close to the entrance of the facility or near the
office area so that a supervisor can call emergency services as soon
as possible following an accident (2). The ADA also requires that
light switches, water founta ins, fire extinguishers, and automated
external defibri llator (AED) devices are reachable and that safety
signage is view able b y persons in wheelchairs (3).
A weigh t room should also have double or garage doors so that
large equipment and machine s can be moved in and out. Howev er, if
the hallway or access point is too narrow, the size of the doors will
not make a difference (14), because an outside wall will have to be
removed tempor arily when mo ving or instal ling equipment.
Ceiling  Height
The ceiling should be high enough to accommodate any jumping or
explosiv e activities. This includes the height of the athlete plus the
space required for box jumps, vertical jumps, and weightl ifting
exercises. A recommended height is 12 to 14 feet (3.7-4.3 m), which
should give enough clearance to allow athletes to comfortably
perform most activities (14, 18). Certain exercises, such as overhead
medicine ball throws, may require additional overhead clearance. In
scenarios when sufficient overhead clearance is not available to
perform an exercise, using a nearb y outdoor field, fieldhouse, or
gymnasium should yield enough space. Howev er, these decisions
related to session management should be initiated in the planning
and design process to account for the impact on additional traffic
flow in and out of the f acility during tr aining sessions.
1743
Flooring
Several types of flooring options are available for a strength and
condi tioning facility. The most common option is some type of
rubber flooring  and an antimicr obial carpet. Another option is indoor
turf, which can be useful if the strength and conditioning
professional plans to have athletes perform dynamic warm-up ,
plyometric, agility, or condi tioning exercises. Turf is also a good
surface for ground-based movements and sled pushes that require a
more field-like surface than typical gym flooring. Rubber  flooring is
available in rolls, tile inserts,  and mats and is consider ed a premier
option because it protects the subfloor from heavy weights and
provides durable cushioning. Rubber flooring can also be easier to
clean than carpet and is generally more durable and long-lasting
within a facility. As a gener al rule for safety, floor surfaces in physical
activity areas should be slip-resistant to minimiz e the risk of exercise
and fall-related injuries (2).
For facilities designed to train athletes for weightlifting
competi tions, platforms should have a middle portion made of wood
and outer sections made of rubber , in alignment with competi tion
rules. Especial ly in high-tr affic strength and condi tioning facilities,
inlaid platforms are a safer alternativ e to raised platforms because
they ar e flush wi th the floor and do not pr esent a tripping hazar d.
Lighting
Strength and condi tioning facilities have special lighting needs to
keep athletes safe and focused on training. Key lighting
consider ations should include energy efficiency and the use of
natural lighting when possible (11). To determine proper lighting,
one must consider the squar e footage of the facility, ceiling height,
and the amount of natural sunlight entering the facility through
windows. Lighting is recommended between 20 to 30 foot candles
(fc; 1 fc = lumen/ft2) or 200 to 300 lux (lx; 1 lx = lumen/m2) at floor
level for gener al gym areas and up to 50 foot candles or 500 lux for
dedicated r esistance tr aining and gr oup ex ercise ar eas (2, 11, 18).
1744
The distributio n of light throughout the facility is important to
avoid shadowy areas or excessiv e glare. Glare from direct overhead
lighting is especial ly a concern for users lying on horizontal benches
or exercise mats (18). Windo ws can help make a facility feel more
open and modern, and mirrors may enhance the amount of light
that comes in by reflecting it to spots in the room without natural
light (2). Light-emitting diode (LED) lights are a popular choice
because of their extended life span and energy efficiency (2). Lights
with color temper atures between 4,000° and 5,000° Kelvin are
consider ed best for strength and condi tioning facilities because they
resemble daylight, provide optimal visibility for enhanced safety, and
can have an energizing effect. Finally, adjustable lighting controls,
automated on-and-of f settings, and motion sensors also can be
consider ed to reduce power consumption, energy costs, and
maintenance (11).
Room Temperature, Humidity, and
Ventilation
A strength and condi tioning facility needs to maintain a comfortable
training tempe rature. The heating, ventilation, and air conditioning
(HVAC) system should have the capabi lity to heat and cool individual
sections of the facility. Most sources indicate that between  68 °F and
78 °F (20-26 °C) is an appropriate temper ature range, with many
suggesting an optimal range of 68 °F to 74 °F (20-23 °C) (2, 5, 18).
If the facility is too hot or too cold, the athletes and staff may be
uncomf ortable and the qual ity of tr aining wi ll be af fected.
Relative humidi ty should also be monitored in the strength and
condi tioning facility (6). In any space where there is physical activity,
relative humid ity should not exceed 60%. This helps to prevent
bacterial and microbial growth, avoiding the spread of infections and
disease (2, 15). In addition, areas in a facility with excessiv e
moistur e can contribute to rust and damage weight room equipment
(5). This may be more of a concern if the weight training facility is
located near a humid pool or spa area within the building. Ensuring
1745
that any adjacent pool or spa areas are equipped with negativ e
exhaust air flow helps to prevent moistur e and chlorine odor from
escaping into other ar eas of the tr aining f acility (2).
Ventilation and circulation are primary concerns with regard to
facility design and the HVAC system. The HVAC system, a fresh air
exchange system, and ceiling or box fans should provide necessary
ventilation and circulation that are in accordance with ANSI/A SHRAE
62.1 requirements for health clubs and weight rooms (6). Air
systems must provide air circulation at proper levels according to the
needs of specific equipmen t areas and occupant loads (6). For
example, aerobic training areas require a higher circulation  rate than
resistance training spaces (2). Room air should be exchanged a
minimum of 8 to 10 times per hour—optimal ly 12 to 15 times per
hour to prevent odors and stagnant air (5). If fans are used, a
gener al guidel ine is two to four fans for every 1,200 squar e feet (111
m2). Fans help keep the air from feeling stagnant and muggy , which
makes for a bet ter training en vironment.
Sound Systems and Noise Control
While not essential, many facilities have sound systems that help
create a motiv ating training environment conduciv e to hard work.
The two main consider ations for installing a sound system are
speak er volume and placement. The sound volume should be less
than 90 decibels so that athletes can hear instructions and coaching
cues (2). To avoid damage, speak ers should be elevated above the
height of all training equipment. Placing speak ers in the corner
allows sound to project toward the middle of the room so that it is
more evenly distributed. The use of headphones is not
recommended. Headphones can interfere with coaching and
instruction and limit athletes’ awareness of their surroundings in the
case of an emer gency .
Backgr ound noise and excess external noise are other issues to
consider . Such sounds can emanate from sources ranging from the
HVAC system to the people in the next building. In a facility that has
1746
yoga or dance classes, sound-absorbing material should be used in
the floors and walls to prevent music from reaching others in the
facility. Absorbent rubber flooring can be used to reduce noise
caused b y people jumping, running, or dr opping things.
Electrical Service and Devices
A strength and condi tioning facility typical ly requires more outlets
than other buildings. Some outlets may require relatively higher
voltage for more powerf ul equipment, such as stair climbers,
elliptical trainers, and treadm ills. The electrical service also needs to
be properly grounded to protect the system from lightning strikes or
power surges. Ground fault circuit interrupter (GFCI) outlets are also
necessary to ensur e safety in the ev ent of an electrical short (1).
With the increase of technology now being used in weight rooms,
the placement of wall, floor, and elevated power outlets should be
consider ed to limit future issues with devices and power cords once
the facility becomes operational. Specifically, power cords should
never extend into exercise areas, safety spacing, walkways, or
spotter areas. In addition, any equipment and device charging
stations should be in an office or storage area away from weight
room traffic. If televisions will be used in the facility, the use of
elevated outlets and secur ed wall or ceiling mounts are
recommended. Planning ahead for the use of technology is valuable,
especial ly if the intent is to use television monitors or overhead
projectors to communicate work outs and announcements.
Walls and Mirrors
Mirrors can be used for many purposes in a strength and
condi tioning facility. They can be used as a coaching tool if racks and
platforms are placed in the right position, because they provide
immediate visual feedback for improved spatial awareness and
safety (14). Mirrors can also be used to enhance a room
aesthetical ly.
1747
Mirrors should be placed at least 6 inches (15 cm) away from any
equipment (e.g., behind a rack of dumbbel ls) and a minim um of 20
inches (51 cm) above the floor (4). The purpose of the height
guidel ine is to ensur e that weights do not roll, bounce, or slide into
the bottom of the mirror and cause the glass to break. The standar d
weight plate is 18 inches (46 cm) in diameter , giving mirrors a 2-inch
(5 cm) clearance if the plate is dropped near the mirror or leaned
against the w all behind the mirr or (14).
Bumper railings or padding may be useful for places that require
added protection from dama ge, such as walls and mirrors. Railings
are also used in dance and yoga studios so people can hold on for
balance when  necessary . Balance railings should be installed
secur ely with safety in mind and check ed regularly before any
weight -bearing activity. The choice of material and beam structur e
used for constructing walls (e.g., drywall or cinder block) should be
consider ed for properly securing balance railings and other wall
attachments. Also, strength and condi tioning professional s who plan
to program medicine ball throws into a wall should make sure to use
a solid wall, such as cinder block, to pr event damage.
Hydration and Nutrition Spaces in the
Weight Room
Drinking fountains and water bottle refill stations are important
additions to a strength and condi tioning facility. They should be
located away from the training area and should not interrupt traffic
flow. Water stations and nutrition areas are often placed next to the
entrance of the facility or next to the bathrooms and lockers. With
the increased emphasis on nutrition and recovery for athletes,
nutrition areas that include food preparation and appliances, such as
blenders, knives, cutting boards, and refrigeration, are subject to
safe food handl ing requirements. In the United States, such
requirements are governed by the U.S. Food and Drug
Administr ation (22), U.S. Department of Agricul ture (22), and U.S.
Centers for Disease Contr ol and Prevention (CDC) (19), all of which
1748
have policies and recommendations to avoid food poisoning and
food contamination. (See Standar d 9.1 in the NSCA Strength and
Condi tioning Professional Standar ds and Guidel ines for additional
detail on the responsibi lity of strength and condi tioning professionals
related to supplements, er gogenic aids, and drugs [16]. )
Locker and Changing Room Access
Access to locker rooms is a good benefi t within a facility. At
minimum, having a shower located somewher e in the building
ensur es that cleaning up after a workout will be convenient. Good
hygiene is important for preventing the spread of infections and
disease. Although not everyone will use the showers or lockers,
having them available for on-the-go athletes may boost morale and
give them another r eason to work har d during a work out.
Storage Spaces
A strength and condi tioning facility should have a dedicated storage
space to keep items such as extra equipment, cleaning supplies,
facility maintenance tools, or broken equipment. A larger facility with
more equipment requires more storage space than a small facility.
Depending on the layout of the facility, or if it has multiple floors,
multiple storage areas may be best to avoid excessiv e clutter or
injury from equipment not being used. For example, an athlete or
strength and condi tioning professional may injure his or her fingers
while racking and storing weights on a plate tree in a space that is
too narrow and filled with unnecessary equipment accessories.
Additional areas to watch for excessiv e clutter include underneath
dumbbel l storage racks, around shelving units, in suspension training
areas (8), and in corners and other tight spaces. Making sure that
equipment is stored safely and secur ely improves weight room
organization and maintains the longevi ty of the equipment.
In addition to the storage of training equipment, all necessary
emergency equipment should be kept in or near the training facility
to be quickly accessible (16). Such equipment must include a fire
1749
extinguisher , AED, CPR equipment, and a stocked first aid kit.
Additional details about emergency policies and action plans are
presented in chapter 26 .
Other areas to consider related to storage include determining
where athletes will store personal items, such as coats, backpacks,
and water bottles, during training sessions. If no locker room is
available at the facility, designating an area for personal item storage
is important to avoid clutter. The use of cube storage, shelving, or
other functiona l storage solutions can help maintain organizational
flow of the weight r oom.
1750
Arranging Equipment in the Strength
and Conditioning Facility
It is essential to consider spacing requirements when arranging
equipment in the strength and condi tioning facility. A floor plan can
be drawn to help with visual izing how to arrange equipment,
especial ly since each type of equipment and mode of exercise comes
with its own saf ety and ef ficiency r ecommendations.
Equipment Placement
Equipment should be grouped into sections such as a stretching and
warm-up area, agility and plyometrics, free weights, aerobic area,
and resistance  machines. Ideally, free weights and racks should be
organized along the wall, and there should be walkways between the
free weights and machines (1). Racks and machines also can be
placed in rows with the back of the equipment facing each other.
This allows for improved flow through the weight room, preventing
congestion and maximizing usage space.
Using line of sight as a guideline, shorter equipment is better
placed in the middle of the room so that strength and conditioning
professionals and staff can easily see across the facility. Planning
ahead and organizing the equipment so it can be used as a circuit or
exercise pairin g will also help with traffic flow. Tall machi nes should
be bol ted to the floor , a column, or the w all to pr event tipping o ver.
Cardiovascular machines should be in their own section and
should be lined up and organized such that the treadmi lls, elliptical
trainers, stair climbers, ski trainers, rowers, and bikes are grouped
together . Similarly, dedicated exercise and performance testing
devices should be in their own section and grouped to ensur e the
consistent administr ation, validity, and reliability of testing
procedur es. Keep in mind that most machines requiring electrici ty
will have to be along a wall unless electrical outlets are available in
the floor or on a column. Equipment should also be placed away
1751
from the walkway to minimiz e the chances of someone tripping over
it or on associated electrical cor ds.
Racks, barbel ls, and dumbbel ls should have a minimum of 3 feet
(0.9 m) of space between equipment to allow for movement without
danger to the athlete or spotter. If a spotter or multiple spotters are
needed (e.g., on a rack), providing additional space  may be
required.
Traffic Flow
Traffic flow is heavily influenced by equipment placement. Many
facilities are one big room, and walkways can be created via
arrangement of the equipment. As mentioned, most racks or
machines are best placed lined up in a row running the length of the
facility. This usually creates two or three main walkways that should
be 5 to 7 feet (1.5-2.1 m) wide (2, 3, 13). For safety, all individuals
in the training facility should have clear access to an exit at all times.
Ensuring proper equipment and walkway spacing is important for
allowing clearance to move freely throughout the facility and for
ADA-required wheelchair ac cess (3, 13).
Weight Room Pillars and Building
Structures
When placing equipment in facilities that contain supporting
structur e, such as weight room pillars, columns, or other weight
room obstructions, logistical planning for training sessions and safety
factors should be prioritized. Due to the large size of many strength
and condi tioning facilities, the inclusion of weight -supp orting and
other building structur es may be unavoidable. Strategical ly placing
training equipment with consider ation of any vertical weight room
pillars or horizontal structu ral beams and designatin g specific
exercise and storage areas within the facility layout considering
proximity to building structur es minimiz e facility congestion and will
improve training session organization. Adhering to the safety spacing
1752
and equipment guidel ines in this chapter around building structur es
will impr ove the f unctional ity and tr affic flow of the f acility.
Safety, function, and traffic flow are top priorities when
deciding on the placement of equipment in a facility.
Stretching and Warm-Up Area
A stretching and warm-up area is an open area with soft tissue
instruments, mats, or elastic bands. This area may include foam
rollers and other tissue rolling tools (e.g., PVC pipes, and lacrosse,
tennis, golf, or softbal l balls) and jump ropes. Mats can be used so
that athletes do not have to lie on a hard floor, but this is not
necessary .
Circuit Training Area
A circuit training area is typical ly a space with machines lined up or
grouped together to make it easy for people to switch from one
machine to the next. Grouping the machines can be done in several
ways. Examples of different groupings include upper body and lower
body, pushing actions and pulling actions, and various body part
groupings. In many facilities, injured athletes use the circuit
machines to exercise the body parts that are still healthy. Ease of
access betwee n machines should be kept in mind so that injured
athletes can move freely. Stationary circuit training machines should
be at least 30 inches (76 cm) (3), preferably 36 inches (91 cm),
away from each other to provide a wide enough area and some
extra space for safety. Safety spacing in the weight room is gener ally
referred to as a safety cushion .
Free W eights
Free weight equipment includes dumbbel ls, barbel ls, benches,
kettlebel ls, farmer ’s walk handles, hexagonal bars, squat racks, and
any other equipment necessary to use these items. Kettlebel ls can
be lined up neatly under a dumbbel l rack or in their own section.
1753
Since most activities with a kettlebel l are dynamic and require space
to complete a variety of movements, this section should be large
enough to accommodate both the exercises being performed and
the number of athletes using the space simul taneously .
Weightlifting Area
A weightl ifting area gener ally contains racks with platforms or a
platform standing alone. It could also be an open area where
weightl ifting is performed without a platform. This is typical ly done
on a rubber floor with a concr ete foundation. To keep things
organized, weight trees or racks and bar holders can be used when
the equipment is not in use.
Racks and platforms should have enough room between them
that if someone were to fall, people nearb y would not be injured.
Weightl ifting racks should be bolted to the floor to ensur e that they
do not move when in use. If a rack is portable, it should  be moved
to a designated stor age ar ea when not in use.
Exercise and Performance Testing Spaces
Exercise testing equipment should be in their own section or
dedicated space. Exercise testing spaces are where equipment is
grouped together for exercise testing sessions. This equipment may
consist of force plates, isometric mid-thigh pulling racks, exercise
testing bikes and treadmi lls, testing and monitoring device charging
stations, and associated computer equipment. Ensuring a consistent
location for exercise testing within the training facility is optimal for
ensuring the v alidity and r eliability of ex ercise testing.
It is also important to consid er safety in implementing technology
devices that are specifically designed for integr ation into free weight
and weightlifting areas. Such equipment includes rack-mounted
training feedback tablets, barbel l attachments, linear position
transducers, accelerometers, and mounted camer a systems. As a
gener al rule, weight room technology should be set up and
administer ed in a way that does not impede planned safety space
1754
(i.e., safety cushion) or interfere with the position of the spotters.
Additional consider ations should be made for the placement of
clocks and television monitors that contain pertinent information to
ensur e optimal visibi lity throughout the tr aining session.
Aerobic Area
The aerobic area is where the cardiovascular training equipment is
grouped together . This equipment consists of stationar y bicycles,
stair climbers, elliptical trainers, treadmi lls, rowers, and so on. A
gener al guidel ine is to allocate approximately 40 to 60 squar e feet
(3.7-5.6 m2) of floor space  per piece of equipment (2). Specific floor
space requirements for aerobic equipment and the recommended
space between pieces of equipment are provided in table 25.1.
These requirements outline the amount of space neede d for each
piece of equipment, along with the required amount of space to
allow for room to move and prevent accidents caused by falling into
equipment. Within aerobic training areas it is important that there is
adequate spacing around and behind all continuous-motio n exercise
equipment (e.g., treadmi lls, elliptical trainers, bikes, ski trainers, and
rowers) (2).
TABLE 25.1  Aerobic Equipment Space Estimates
Equipment Minimum space needed
Bike (upright) 30 ft2 (2.8 m2)
Bike (recumbent) 38 ft2 (3.5 m2)
Elliptical tr ainer 47 ft2 (4.4 m2)
Ski trainer 31 ft2 (2.9 m2)
Stair cl imber 35 ft2 (3.3 m2)
Rower 48 ft2 (4.5 m2)
Adapted by permission from B. Kroll, “Structur al and Functional Consider ations in
Designing the Facility: Part I,” National Strength and Condi tioning Association Journal  13,
no. 1 (1991): 51-58, with updates made to comply with ADA Standar ds for Accessible
Design (Uni ted States Department of Justice, 2010), 104-116, 224-252.
1755
Equipment Minimum space needed
Treadmi ll 53 ft2 (4.9 m2)
Adapted by permission from B. Kroll, “Structur al and Functional Consider ations in
Designing the Facility: Part I,” National Strength and Condi tioning Association Journal  13,
no. 1 (1991): 51-58, with updates made to comply with ADA Standar ds for Accessible
Design (Uni ted States Department of Justice, 2010), 104-116, 224-252.
Indoor Sprint Track and Turf Lanes
Indoor track and turf lanes are beneficial for incorpor ating
plyometric, speed, and agility training. These surfaces also can be
used to implement warm-up and dynamic movement programs with
athletes. When  track and turf lanes are incorpor ated within training
facilities, in proximity to other strength and condi tioning equipment,
special consider ations should be taken to enhance safety and reduce
the risk of injury and l iability concerns.
Based on the specific needs and training goals, sideline, distance,
and running lane markings should be consider ed to optimiz e session
management and athlete instruction. Track and turf lanes should
remain clear of unnecessary equipment to avoid tripping and other
injury . Conside ring how many athletes will be using the turf and
track lanes simultaneously is essential to identi fying space
requirements.
The length of track and turf lanes will determine the ability to
administer certain assessments. For example, a 20-meter (22 yd)
track lane would not be suitable to perform the Yo-Yo intermi ttent
recovery test due to the added 5 meters (5.5 yd) of length required
for jogging recovery betwee n test interv als. Also, the amount of
space required at the ends of the track or turf lanes to allow for
deceler ation is an important safety consider ation. Deter mining the
amount of space needed to deceler ate will depend on the
demogr aphic and skill level of those being trained. While it is
common for padding to be installed on back-end walls to prevent
injury , it is best to avoid unnecessary collisions with an adequate
space al lowance.
1756
Suspension Training Equipment
Suspension training equipment  refers to commer cially available ring,
handle, or strap setups (8). They are most often used for
bodyweight training focusing  on upper body, lower body, and core.
The straps of a suspension training unit can be anchor ed
independent of each other (e.g., gymnastics ring) or connected by a
common anchor (e.g., eyelet and carabiner). Specific usage should
be in accordance with setup and loading guidel ines determined by
the equipment manuf acturer.
Safe and effective suspension training requires a stable
attachment point, level nonskid flooring, open space free of
obstacles, and handles that are easy to grip (e.g., not worn or
slippery) (8). Because suspension training equipment must be
attached to a fixed structur e (e.g., load-bearing wall mount, bolted
rack, or rig frame), it is suggested that the strength and conditioning
professional regularly checks the integri ty of the anchor point before
each use. Ideally, the anchor point should be between 7 to 9 feet
(2.1-2. 7 m) above the floor. Further , suspension training equipment
should not be mounted in or near doorw ays to prevent blocking
emergency exits and hindering access to storage areas, cleaning
closets, lock er rooms, and r estrooms.
All accessories  used to mount suspension training equipment
should be load bearing. As a gener al rule, any carabiner and snap
hook used for exercise purposes should be load-r ated for physical
activity and include a secondary screw-locking mechanism to prevent
risks of falls or drops causing a potential injury . In the United States,
carabiners used for fall protection must meet OSHA standar ds, which
specify a minimum tensile (breaking) strength of 5,000 lbs (22kN)
(17). Outside of the United States, Conformité Européen ne (CE) or
other third-part y rating requirements should be referenced to select
connectors wi th appr opriate load r atings f or saf ety.
Table 25.2 summa rizes the space needs for a range of exercise
types. Note that there are unique formulas that are specific to each
1757
type with several example calculations, including those based on
metric appr oximations.
TABLE 25.2  Calculations for Space Needs
Exercise
typeExamples of
exercises Formulas and examples
Prone and
supine
exercises wi th
barBench pr ess;
lying triceps
extension;
hip thrustFormula:  DEPTH: actual weight bench lengtha (6-8 ft
[1.8-2.4 m]) + a saf ety cushion of 3 ft (0.9 m)  multiplied
by WIDTH: actual bar length (4-7 ft [1.2-2.1 m]) + a
double- wide saf ety cushion of 6 ft (1.8 m)
Example 1:  If using a 6 ft long weight bench and a 7 ft
Olympic bar f or the bench pr ess ex ercise: DEPTH: (6 ft
[bench] + 3 ft [saf ety cushion])  × WIDTH: (7 ft [bar] + 6
ft [double- wide saf ety cushion]) = 117 ft2
Example 2 (metric approximations):  If using a 2 m
long weight bench and a 1 m long bar f or the lying triceps
extension ex ercise: DEPTH: (2 m [bench] + 1 m [saf ety
cushion])  × WIDTH: (1 m [bar] + 2 m [double- wide saf ety
cushion]) = 9 m2
Standing
exercisesBiceps curl;
upright r owFormula:  DEPTH: a suggested user space of 2 ft (0.6 m)
for a standing ex ercise + a saf ety cushion of 3 ft (0.9 m)
multiplied by WIDTH: actual bar lengthb (4-7 ft [1.2-2.1
m]) + a double- wide saf ety cushion of 6 ft (1.8 m)
Example 1:  If using a 4 ft curl bar f or the biceps curl
exercise: DEPTH: (2 ft [user space] + 3 ft [saf ety
cushion])  × WIDTH: (4 ft [bar] + 6 ft [double- wide saf ety
cushion]) = 50 ft2
Example 2 (metric approximations):  If using a 2 m
bar for the upright r ow ex ercise: DEPTH: (1 m [user
space] + 1 m [saf ety cushion])  × WIDTH: (2 m [bar] + 2
m [double- wide saf ety cushion]) = 8 m2
Standing
exercises
from a r ackBack squat;
shoulder
pressFormula:  DEPTH: a suggested user space of 8-10 ft (2.4-
3.0 m) f or a standing ex ercise (f rom a r ack) multiplied by
WIDTH: actual bar length (5-7 ft [1.5-2.1 m]) + a double-
wide saf ety cushion of 6 ft (1.8 m)
Example 1:  If using a 7 ft Olympic bar f or the back squat
exercise: DEPTH: (10 ft [user space])  × WIDTH: (7 ft [bar]
1758
Exercise
typeExamples of
exercises Formulas and examples
+ 6 ft [double- wide saf ety cushion]) = 130 ft2
Example 2 (metric approximations):  If using a 2 m
Olympic bar f or the shoulder pr ess ex ercise: DEPTH: (3 m
[user space])  × WIDTH: (2 m [bar] + 2 m [double- wide
safety cushion]) = 12 m2
Weightl ifting
exercisesPower clean;
power snatchFormula (on inlaid rubber flooring):  DEPTH: a
suggested user space of 8-10 ft (2.4-3.0 m) f or a
weightl ifting ex ercise multiplied by WIDTH: actual bar
length (6-7 ft [1.8-2.1 m]) + a double- wide saf ety cushion
of 6 ft (1.8 m)
Formula (on an elevated wood platform):  DEPTH:
lifting platf orm length (t ypical ly 8 ft [2.4 m]) + a saf ety
cushion of 3 ft (0.9 m)  multiplied by WIDTH: lifting
platform width (t ypical ly 8 ft [2.4 m]) + a double- wide
safety cushion of 6 ft (1.8 m)
Example 1 (on inlaid rubber flooring):  DEPTH: (10 ft
[user space])  × WIDTH: (7 ft [bar] + 6 ft [double- wide
safety cushion]) = 130 ft2
Example 2 (on an elevated wood platform; metric
approximations):
DEPTH: (2.5 m [platf orm length] + 1 m [saf ety cushion])
× WIDTH: (2.5 m [platf orm width] + 2 m [double- wide
safety cushion]) ≈ 16 m2
Landmine
exercisesLandmine
squat; hal f-
kneeling
landmine
pressFormula:  The minimum space need is based on the ar ea
(A) of a cir cle (A = π  × r2): The r adius (r) of the cir cle is
comprised of the actual bar length (5-7 ft [1.5-2.1 m]) + a
suggested user space of 2 ft (0.6 m) f or a landmine
exercise + a saf ety cushion of 3 ft (0.9 m). A minimum of
90 degr ees of mo vement is r equired for the r ange of
motion at the user end of the bar f or a landmine ex ercise;
90 degr ees is one-quarter of a 360-degr ee cir cle. Thus, the
formula is (π  × [actual bar length + user space + saf ety
cushion]2) divided b y 4. (Use 3.14 f or the v alue of  π.)
Example 1:  If using a 7 ft Olympic bar f or the landmine
squat ex ercise: (π  × [7 ft {bar} + 2 ft {user space} + 3 ft
{safety cushion}]2) ÷ 4 ≈ 113 ft2
1759
Exercise
typeExamples of
exercises Formulas and examples
Example 2 (metric approximations):  If using a 2 m
Olympic bar f or the hal f-kneel ing landmine pr ess ex ercise:
(π × [2 m {bar} + 1 m {user space} + 1 m {saf ety
cushion}]2) ÷ 4 ≈ 12.5 m2
Suspension
training
exercisesSuspension
row; foot-
elevated
knee tuckFormula:  DEPTH: actual distance of the f oot posi tion (the
farthest f oot posi tion if the f eet ar e stagger ed) from the
anchor point of the suspension str ap (measur e out f rom a
spot on the gr ound dir ectly under the anchor point) + the
athlete’ s height + a saf ety cushion of 3 ft (0.9 m)
multiplied by WID TH: a suggested user space of 2 ft (0.6
m) for a suspension ex ercise + a double- wide saf ety
cushion of 6 ft (1.8 m)
Example 1 (angled use):  If a 6 ft tal l athlete is doing an
angled suspension ex ercise (e.g. , a suspension r ow) wi th
both f eet posi tioned 3 ft f rom the suspension str ap anchor
point: DEPTH: (3 ft [distance out f rom under the anchor
point] + 6 ft [athlete’ s height] + 3 ft [perimeter w alkway
safety cushion])  × WIDTH: (2 ft [user space] + 6 ft [saf ety
cushion]) = 96 ft2
Example 2 (vertical or perpendicular use; metric
approximations):  If a 1.6 m tal l athlete is doing a pr one
suspension ex ercise (e.g. , a foot-elevated knee tuck) wi th
the feet in the str aps dir ectly below the anchor point:
DEPTH: (0 m [distance out f rom under the anchor point] +
1.6 m [athlete height] + 1 m [saf ety cushion])  × WIDTH:
(1 m [user space] + 2 m [saf ety cushion]) ≈ 8 m2
aFor prone and supine ground-based barbel l exercises with no bench, use the athlete’ s
height f or the DEPTH.
bFor dumb bell and kettlebel l exercises (i.e., standing exercises without a bar), use a user
space of 2 ft (0.6 m) f or the WID TH.
Organizing a facility begins with arranging the equipment in a
safe, functional space. The guidel ines in this chapter provide the
tools necessary to properly arrange the equipment. Taking a blank
floor plan of the facility and sketching the equipment arrangement
on the blank plan will help with equipment placement. Figures 25.3
and 25.4 on pages 812 and 813, respectively, show example s of
1760
weight room floor plans for secondary school and university settings.
Notice the walkway spacin g and arrangement, as well as the
organization and grouping of the equipment. Also note the
placement of the supervisor ’s office, window placement, and storage
areas.
1761
Maintaining and Cleaning Surfaces and
Equipment
Surfaces in the strength and condi tioning facility should be cleaned,
sanitized, and disinfected consistently to ensur e that the equipment
is safe and functional. Proper maintenance will reduce cost in the
long run, because cleaning supplies are cheaper than replacing
padding, flooring, exercise mats, and so on. Microbes will begin to
grow if the surfaces are not wiped down with a germicid al cleaner .
Equipment and surfaces that are used more often and have a
greater chance of developing bacterial growth (e.g., padding and
vinyl), should be cleaned daily or every other day. It is important
that any germicidal cleaner used in the strength facility have the
ability to prevent the spread of germs, including bacteria, viruses,
parasites, and fungi, and illness, such as the flu, COVID-19, HIV,
hepati tis, and ringworm (or other infectious rashes). After cleaning
surfaces and equipment to remove any dirt and debris, the CDC
recommends sanitizing and disinfecting surfaces with an EPA-
register ed disinfecting product to eliminate and inactiv ate germs to
reduce the spread of illness (20). For laundry items, such as cleaning
rags and gym towels, use detergent and the hottest available water
setting, and dry i tems completely .
Nonabsorbent floors should be regularly mopped for removal of
dust and grime buildup. Wood weightl ifting platforms should also be
check ed for splintering and cracking and cleaned with an appropriate
cleaner to remove dust and dirt that could cause foot slippage.
When cleaning around racks and machinery , the bolts and screws
that hold the equipment to the floor should also be tightened or
check ed regula rly (4). Machines that have cables and pulleys should
be regularly check ed and should be repaired if the cables and pulleys
are loose or fraying. If the facility has a tiled or rolled rubber floor,
minimal gaps should appear between the pieces and no visible glue
1762
should extrude between the cracks. Carpet should be vacuumed and
cleaned r egularly to pr event mold, mi ldew, or fungal gr owth.
Walls and ceilings should also be cleaned at least once every
week or two. The walls and ceilings should have no dirt buildup, and
there should not be any dust in the corners. Dust and cobwebs tend
to build up high in the corners where the walls meet the ceiling and
should be removed. If the facility has windows and mirrors, they
should be regularly check ed for cracking and replaced as soon as a
crack is noticed. Clean windows and mirrors also enhance the
appear ance of the facility. Use a window cleaner and microfiber
towel to leave the surface streak free. Dirt and dust can build up on
flat edges of items affixed to the wall or fixtures hanging from the
ceiling. Any windowsi lls, shelves, or anything hanging from the
ceiling should be dusted regularly . If exercise equipment is hanging
from the ceiling, it should be regularly check ed to ensur e that it is
tightly secur ed and will not fall down (4). Figure 25.5 on page 814
presents a list to refer to when creating a cleaning schedule for the
floors, w alls, and cei lings.
Scheduling frequent maintenance and cleaning ensures
safety, protects equipment, and maintains the
appearance of the strength and conditioning facility.
Maintenance should include not only the surface materials but
also the equipment. The equipment should be regularly check ed for
broken or damaged parts, particularly those that affect functional ity.
If the equipment is used often and not cleaned enough, residue can
build up that may cause functional or health issues. Nonfunctional
equipment should be labeled with an “Out of Order” sign (2). If
there is a delay before fixing broken equipment, it should be
removed from the floor and placed in storage. As with surfaces,
equipment repairs can end up costing more if it is not maintained
and cleaned properly . Malfunctioning equipment also increases the
1763
risk of legal liability to strength and condi tioning professionals and
institutions (16).
The NSCA ’s safety checkl ist for exercise facility and equipment
maintenance (figure 25.6; pages 815-817 ) is helpful for determining
the maintenance needs of exercise equipment. A cleaning schedule
should be made that specifies the equipment to be cleaned daily,
weekly , biweekly , or monthly . The checkl ist also covers facility layout
issues, especial ly those r elating to saf ety.
Cleaning and maintenance materials should be kept in a locked
storage closet for use when needed. Any hazar dous cleaning
products and chemicals should be clearly labeled and only accessible
to adults. Any tools should be stored in a toolbo x that is put away
and out of sight of the weight room. Tools and cleaning materials
should also be regularly inventoried and restock ed. A list of
maintenance equipment and cleaning supplies is provided in table
25.3.
TABLE 25.3  Equipment and Supplies for
Maintenance and Cleaning
Maintenance equipment Cleaning supplies
File
Hammer
Pliers
Screwdriv er set
Allen wr ench set
Adjustable wr ench set
Knife, hea vy-duty scissors, and/or
box cutter
Stapler
Duct tape
Extra nuts, bol ts, and w ashers
Heavy-duty glue
Drill and dri ll bit set
Vise grips
Adjustable ladder or step stoolDisinf ectant (germicide)
Special ty cleaners (e.g. , wood, w alls, upholstery)
Glass cleaner
Lubrication
Paper towels
Spray bottles
Cloth towels and r ags
Sponges
Brooms and dustpans
Vacuum cleaner and/or wet v acuum cleaner
Mop and buck et
Stain r emover
Wire brush
Cleaning extension poles (f or out -of-reach cei lings,
mirrors, and w alls)
1764
Conclusion
Designing a strength and conditioning facility is an extensiv e process
that involves a significant amount of planning. The process begins
with the formation of a comm ittee that will contribute to the design
and constructio n of the facility. The next step involves assessing the
specific needs of the strength and condi tioning department. This is
the phase in which the number and experience level of athletes
being trained, preferences from strength and condi tioning
professionals and staff, schedul ing, and equipment needs should be
determined. After these determinations have been made, the
process of designing the facility and arranging the equipment can
begin. Care should be taken and guidel ines followed in arranging
and spacing equipment to optimiz e safety, function, and tr affic flow .
After the design process is complete, the facility and the
equipment must be properly maintained and cared for to ensure safe
training and protect financial  investments. Regular mainte nance and
cleaning of equipment and surfaces are vital for the longevi ty of the
facility, in addition to health and safety. Cleaning and maintenance
should focus the most on high-tr affic areas and equipm ent that is
used more often. This will help to prevent the spread of infections
and disease among the facility users as well as promote proper
hygiene and maintain the appear ance of the environment. It is also
suggested that once the facility is operational, key stakeholders meet
periodical ly to discuss outcomes and plans f or future changes (9).
KEY TERMS
construction phase
design phase
feasibi lity study
master plan
minimal ly compl iant facility
needs analysis
1765
predesign phase
preoper ation phase
safety cushion
SWOT analysis
STUDY QUESTIONS
  1.  What is consider ed the optimal temper ature range for a
strength and condi tioning f acility?
  a.  58 °F to 64 °F (14-18 °C)
  b.  64 °F to 68 °F (18-20 °C)
  c.  68 °F to 74 °F (20-23 °C)
  d.  74 °F to 78 °F (23-26 °C)
  2.  What is the minimum recommended amount of space per
person wi thin a str ength and condi tioning f acility?
  a.  70 squar e feet (6.5 m2)
  b.  100 squar e feet (9.3 m2)
  c.  130 squar e feet (12.1 m2)
  d.  144 squar e feet (13.4 m2)
  3.  What is the minimum recommended spacing on each side of a
power r ack?
  a.  3 ft (0.9 m)
  b.  4 ft (1.2 m)
  c.  6 ft (1.8 m)
  d.  7 ft (2.1 m)
  4.  What is the recommende d width for designated walkways in a
strength and condi tioning f acility?
  a.  2 to 3 f eet (0.6-0.9 m)
  b.  3 to 5 f eet (0.9-1.5 m)
  c.  5 to 7 f eet (1.5-2.1 m)
  d.  >7 f eet (>2.1 m)
  5.  What is an important consider ation for safely using suspension
trainers?
1766
  a.  R egularly check that al l suspension anchors, ac cessories,
and at tachments ar e properly secur ed for use wi th
consider ation of the load-bearing natur e of the ex ercise.
  b.  Finding a r einforced doorw ay to secur e suspension
training devices is best to optimiz e movement thr oughout
a strength and condi tioning f acility.
  c.  Single-lock car abiners must be used to at tach suspension
trainers to anchor points.
  d.  Saf ety cushion spacing does not apply to suspension
trainers.
1767
FIGURE 25.3 Example of a secondary school strength and condi tioning facility floor plan
(3 ft = 0.9 m).
1768
FIGURE 25.4 Example of a university strength and condi tioning facility floor plan (3 ft =
0.9 m).
1769
Figure 25.5  Checklist for cleaning floors, walls,
ceilings, and surfaces.
Floors
Check floors f or dirt, grime, and chalk bui ldup.
Nonabsorbent floors should be r egularly swept and mopped.
Check carpet f or any moistur e, mold, mi ldew, or fungal gr owth.
Carpet should be v acuumed and cleaned r egularly .
Walls
Check w alls for dirt and dust bui ldup.
Dust and clean w alls at least once ev ery week or two .
Clean mirr ors and windows of smudges at least once per week.
Ceilings
Ceilings and ceiling fixtures should be dusted or cleaned at least once every
week or two .
Open cei lings wi th exposed pipes and ducts should be cleaned as needed.
Check for dust and cobweb buildup (especial ly near corners and HVAC
vents).
Surfaces
Dust windowsi lls and shelving surf aces at least once per week.
Exercise surfaces, mats, and pads that contact skin should be cleaned daily
with germicidal cleaner .
Clean and sanitize hydration and nutrition spaces (drinking fountains, water
bottle refill stations, countertops) dai ly and addi tional ly as needed.
From National Str ength and Condi tioning Association,  Essentials of Str ength
Training and Condi tioning , 5th ed. , edited by G.G. Haf f and N.T . Triplett (Human
Kinetics, 2027).
Figure 25.6  NSCA’s safety checklist for exercise
facility and equipment maintenance.
Exercise Facility
Flooring and Turf Areas
1770
Wooden platforms should be free of splinters, cracks, holes, protruding nails,
loose scr ews, and w arping.
Tighten bolts and screws and ensur e they are secur e in attaching equipment
to the floor .
Tile flooring should be resistant to slipping; no moistur e or chalk
accumulation should appear .
Rubber flooring should be slip resista nt and free of cuts, slits, and gaps
between pieces.
Interlocking mats ar e secur e and arr anged wi th no pr otruding tabs.
Carpet should be f ree of tears; an y worn ar eas should be pr otected b y mats.
Flooring and turf ar e glued or f astened down pr operly .
Walls
Walls in high-activity areas are free of protruding appliances, equipment, or
wall hangings.
Mirrors and shelv es are secur ely fix ed to w alls.
Mirrors ar e placed a minimum of 20 inches (51 cm) of f the floor in al l areas.
Mirrors and windows are not cracked, broken, or distorted (replace
immediately i f damaged).
Bolts and screws are tightened and secure in attaching any balance railing to
the w alls.
Wall hooks and suspension anchors ar e secur e for use wi th attachments.
Ceiling
Ceiling fans, HV AC, and air ex change systems work pr operly .
Lighting is designed to optimiz e visibi lity at floor lev el.
Ceiling height is sufficient for overhea d exercises (12 ft [3.7 m] minimum)
and free of low -hanging appar atus (e.g. , beams, pipes, l ighting, signs).
Ceiling fixtures and attachments are secur e, preventing the risk of falling
objects.
Any damaged or missing cei ling tiles ar e replaced as soon as possible.
Exercise Equipment
Stretching and Bodyweight Exercise Area
Mat ar ea is f ree of weight benches and equipment.
Mats and bench upholstery ar e free of cr acks and tears.
Equipment is pr operly stor ed after use.
Elastic bands ar e secur ed to their base and check ed for wear .
1771
Nonsl ip material appears on the top surface and bottom or base of
plyometric bo xes.
Resistance Training Machine Area
Each station is easily accessed (a minimum of 30 in. [76 cm] between
machines; 36 in. [91 cm] is optimal).
Area is f ree of loose bol ts, scr ews, cables, and chains.
Proper selectoriz ed pins are used and there is adequate storage or hanging
space f or equipment ac cessories.
Securing str aps and locking mechanisms must be f unctional.
Functional parts ar e properly lubricated.
Protectiv e padding is f ree of cr acks and tears.
No pr otruding scr ews or parts need tightening or r emoved.
Belts, chains, and cables ar e aligned wi th machine parts.
No worn parts (e.g., frayed cable, loose chains, worn bolts, cracked joints)
exist.
Resistance Training Free Weight Area
Each bench or area is easily accessible  (a minimum of 30 in. [76 cm] access
clearance; 36 in. [91 cm] is optimal).
Olympic bars are properly spaced (a minimum of 36 inches [91 cm])
between ends.
Dumbbel l racks and other equipment are placed at least 6 inches (15 cm)
away from mirr ors.
All equipment is r eturned after use to a void obstruction of path way.
Safety equipment (e.g. , belts, col lars, saf ety bars) is used and r eturned.
Protectiv e padding is f ree of cr acks and tears.
Bolts and appar atus parts (e.g., collars and attachments) are secur e and
tightly f astened.
Olympic bars turn pr operly and ar e properly lubricated and tightened.
Benches, weight racks, standar ds, and similar equipment are secur ed to the
floor or w all.
Nonfunctional or broken equipment is removed from the area or labeled with
an “out of service” sign.
Weightlifting Area
Olympic bars are properly spaced (a minimum of 36 in. [91 cm]) between
ends.
All equipment is r eturned after use to a void obstruction of l ifting ar ea.
Olympic bars turn pr operly and ar e properly lubricated and tightened.
1772
Bent or rusted Olympic bars are replaced; knurling is brushed and clear of
debris.
Collars ar e functional.
Bumper plates are inspected regularly; bumper plates should be free of
cracks and an y loose bol ts.
Sufficient grip chalk is a vailable.
Wrist straps, belts, and knee wraps are available, functional, and stored
properly .
Benches, chairs, and bo xes are kept at a distance f rom weightl ifting ar ea.
Aerobic Exercise and Exercise Testing Areas
Each station is easily accessible (minimum of 30 in. [76 cm] between
machines; 36 in. [91 cm] is optimal).
Bolts and scr ews ar e secur e and tightened.
Functioning parts ar e easi ly adjustable.
Parts and surf aces ar e properly lubricated and cleaned.
Foot and body str aps ar e secur e and not ripped.
Recalibration and r egular technology device maintenance ar e perf ormed.
Measur ement devices ar e properly f unctioning.
Power cords do not extend into exercise areas, safety spacing, walkways, or
spotter ar eas.
Frequency of Maintenance and Cleaning Tasks
Daily
Inspect al l flooring and wooden platf orms f or damage or wear .
Clean (sweep , vacuum, or mop and disinf ect) al l flooring.
Inspect upholstery f or damage or wear .
Clean and disinf ect upholstery .
Clean and disinf ect hydration and nutri tion ar eas.
Inspect fix ed equipment ’s connection wi th floor , walls, or cei ling.
Clean and disinf ect equipment surf aces that contact skin.
Inspect mirr ors and windows f or damage.
Clean mirr ors and windows of smudges.
Inspect that wall hooks and suspension anchors are secur e for use with
attachments.
Inspect all equipment for damage; wear; fraying; loose or protruding belts,
screws, cables, or chains; insecur e or nonfunctioning foot and body straps;
improper f unctioning or impr oper use of at tachments, pins, or other devices.
1773
Inspect al l protectiv e padding f or cracks and tears.
Inspect nonsl ip material and mats f or proper placement, damage, and wear .
Clean and sani tize exercise mats.
Remove trash and garbage.
Ensur e equipment is r eturned and stor ed properly after use.
Two or Three Times Per Week
Clean and lubricate al l moving parts of equipment and aer obic machines.
Clean and lubricate the guide rods on selectoriz ed resistance training
machines.
Ensur e Olympic bars turn pr operly and ar e properly lubricated and tightened.
Once Per Week or Two
Clean and dust cei ling fixtur es and at tachments.
Clean cei ling tiles.
Clean w alls.
Clean l ight co vers, fans, air v ents, clocks, and speak ers.
As Needed
Replace l ight bulbs.
Replace damaged or missing cei ling tiles.
Clean open cei lings wi th exposed pipes or ducts.
Remove or place “out of or der” sign on br oken equipment.
Fill chalk bo xes.
Clean bar knurl ing.
Remove rust from floor, plates, bars, and equipment with a rust-removing
solution.
Wash and sani tize rags and gym towels per use.
From National Str ength and Condi tioning Association,  Essentials of Str ength
Training and Condi tioning , 5th ed. , edited by G.G. Haf f and N.T . Triplett (Human
Kinetics, 2027).
1774