# Section 26.2

**Book:** "Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning", Edition 5

## Chapter 26: Facility Policies, Procedures, and Legal Issues

**Section:** 26.2 -- Staff Policies

**PDF Pages:** 1781--1788

Strength and Conditioning Performance
Team
The responsibi lities of the strength and condi tioning professional are
continual ly changing as the field grows and becomes better
recogniz ed (22). The strength and condi tioning staff can be aligned
through the hiring of practitioners with formal education and
special ization in specific scienti fic foundations (e.g., anatom y,
exercise physiology , biomechanics). An assembled team allows for
cooper ative expertise by practitioners with complementary  skills and
provides an educational opportuni ty for staff members to gain
knowledge outside of their special ization. Table 26.1 provides a
practical example of a strength and condi tioning performance team.
The director of strength and condi tioning is responsible for
delineating the appropriate duties and responsibi lities to the strength
and conditioning staff for program design, exercise technique,
organization and administr ation, and testing and ev aluation.
TABLE 26.1  Sample Strength and Conditioning
Performance Team
Scientific foundations
education and
expertisePractical and applied
activities and responsibilities Liaison assignment
Exercise and sport
anatom y, biomechanicsExercise techniques, testing and
evaluation, r ehabi litation and
recondi tioningExercise and sport science
faculty, team coaches, sports
medicine team
Exercise and sport
physiologyProgram design; testing and
evaluationExercise and sport science
faculty, team coaches
Exercise and sports
nutritionNutritionist Exercise and sport science
faculty
Adapted by permission from NSCA,  Strength and Condi tioning Professiona l Standar ds and
Guidel ines (NSCA, 2017).
1781
Scientific foundations
education and
expertisePractical and applied
activities and responsibilities Liaison assignment
Exercise and sport
pedagogyProgram design; ex ercise
technique; or ganization and
administr ationExercise and sport science
faculty, athletic
administr ation
Exercise and sport
psychology , motor
learningExercise technique; r ehabi litation
and recondi tioningExercise and sport science
faculty, sports medicine team
Training methodology Program design, or ganization,
and administr ationExercise and sport science
faculty, athletic
administr ation
Kinesiology ,
physiother apy, sports
medicineRehabi litation and r econdi tioning Sports medicine team
Adapted by permission from NSCA,  Strength and Condi tioning Professiona l Standar ds and
Guidel ines (NSCA, 2017).
Although job responsibi lities vary according to institution, it would
be prudent to consul t NSCA Strength and Condi tioning Professional
Standar ds and Guidel ines (30) when one is developin g a strength
and condi tioning performance team. Guidel ine 2.3 of this document
states the f ollowing:
The productivi ty of a Strength and Condi tioning staff, as well as
learning and skill development of individual members, should
be enhanced by aligning a performance team comprised of
qualified practitioners with interdependent expertise and
shared leadership roles. Once the team is assembled,
respectiv e activities and responsibi lities from the domains
identi fied in the Certified Strength and Condi tioning Specialist
(CSCS) Exami nation Content Description, as well as the
appropriate liaison assignmen ts, should be delegated according
to each member ’s particular expertise.
1782
Director of Strength and Conditioning
(Head Strength and Conditioning
Professional)
The director of strength and condi tioning (referred to hereafter as
director)—also commonly referred to as the head strength and
condi tioning professional —is both a practitioner and an
administr ator. This person is responsible for the overall strength and
condi tioning program, facility, equipment, staff, and such
administr ative tasks as preparing a budget, purchasing equipment,
preparing proposals, and working with administr ation and media.
Figure 26.1 shows a sample job listing for such a position. A job
announcement similar to these can be used to attract quality
applicants. Figure 26.2 provides a sample gener al job description
that outlines responsibi lities for a director of strength and
condi tioning.
Figure 26.1  Sample director of strength and
conditioning job listing.
Responsibi lities and duties as assigned by the director of athletics include
developing and monitoring performance training programs for athletic teams,
implementing safe and effective program design based on scienti fic principles,
instructing proper resistance training exercise techniques, speed and agility
development, and testing and evaluation. The head strength and condi tioning
professional will oversee policies and procedur es, facility organization, record
management, and risk management for the strength and condi tioning
performance team in collaboration with the institution. The strength  and
condi tioning professional should work cooper atively with the medical, sports
psychology , and nutrition staff in the interest of student -athlete developm ent,
health, and well-being. A bachelor ’s degree is required, with a master ’s degree
preferred (with emphasis in the exercise sciences). The strength and condi tioning
professional must possess certification from an independent accreditation agency
(e.g., Certified Strength and Condi tioning Special ist by the National Strength  and
Condi tioning Associ ation) and maintain continuing education requirements.  First
aid, cardiopulmonary resusci tation, and automated external defibr illator
certifications required. Two years’ experience is required in progressively
responsible positions involving development and management of sport-specific
individual and group performance training programs. Excellent management,
1783
leadership , communication, supervisory , and management skills are required.
Salary is commensur ate wi th backgr ound and experience.
Based on Casa et al. (2012).
Figure 26.2  Sample strength and conditioning
director job description.
Direct al l facets of staf f, program, and f acility oper ations
Design (or ha ve final r eview of ) all training pr ograms
Oversee the athletic performance operation to ensur e compl iance with
institutional, conf erence, and go verning bodies’ rules and r egulations
Develop and subm it the annual budget and ensur e budgetary compl iance
through ef ficient financial management
Gener ate income and budget available funds for maintenance and
improvement of the f acility
Communicate wi th alumni and stak eholders f or fundraising ini tiatives
Oversee the selection, installation, and maintenance of performance
equipment, including cleaning and r epair
Conduct orientation  meetings for student -athletes on such issues as facility
rules, the value of proper training and nutrition, and the dangers of banned
substances
Develop staff work and supervision schedules, assign duties, and evaluate
performance
Coordinate time schedules for use of the facility by each sport team and
individual student -athletes
Assist wi th on-campus r ecruiting activi ties for prospectiv e student -athletes
Serve on various departmental, institutional, conference, governing body,
and pr ofessional commi ttees and task f orces
Work and communicate wi th coaches in the athletic department
Travel with sport teams (if applicable) and provide remote-si te performance
training programs, including pregame warm-up , cool-down, and recovery
sessions
Maintain a perf ormance tr aining l ibrary for professional dev elopment
Organize continuing  education opportuni ties for strength and condi tioning
staff
Achiev e and maintain professional certifications with continuing education
requirements and a code of ethics, such as the CSCS credential offered
through the NSCA; depending on the professional’ s scope of activities,
responsibi lities, and knowledge requirements, relevant certifications offered
by other go verning bodies ma y also be appr opriate (30)
1784
Perform other duties and special pr ojects as r equested b y supervisor
Perform the duties of the assistant strength and condi tioning professional
and facility supervisor as needed
Adapted f rom Earle (1993) and Epley (1998).
The director is also responsible for developing, presenting, and
enforcing the written policies and procedur es of the staff and
participants in the program. It is the responsibi lity of the director to
ensur e that staff are properly trained and prepared. He or she
achiev es this by having staff and student -athlete orientation
meetings and by periodica lly evaluating the staff’s professional
performance as well as determining and evaluating the attainment of
professional goals. A sample form for the evaluation of student
intern staff members is provided in figure 26.3. This form could be
used to evaluate student interns and adapted to apply more
specifically and effectively to members of the strength and
condi tioning perf ormance team.
Figure 26.3  Student intern evaluation.
Evaluation of staf f member: ____________________________ _
For period:  ______________ _to __________________________ _
The evaluation process is a method of assessing individual performance. It is an
opportuni ty to bring to light any outstanding contributions or deficiencies among
student intern staff members, improve individual job performance, determine
appropriate personnel actions, and stimulate individual dev elopment.
Communication
Has the r espect of the athletes whi le maintaining discipl ine 12345N/A
Teaches pr oper r esistance tr aining ex ercise technique 12345N/A
Has the abi lity to motiv ate athletes and el icit team uni ty 12345N/A
Enforces the weight r oom rules 12345N/A
Exhibi ts courtesy to athletes of both sex es 12345N/A
Does not subject athletes to v erbal or ph ysical abuse 12345N/A
1785
Assumes Responsibility and Leadership
Follows instructions 12345N/A
Is adaptable to new ideas 12345N/A
Is always trying to learn 12345N/A
Does not delegate authori ty without permission 12345N/A
Demonstr ates a high lev el of integri ty 12345N/A
Adjusts tr aining activi ty to fi t skill or age lev el of the athlete 12345N/A
Demonstr ates good judgment 12345N/A
Demonstr ates consistent at tendance and pr omptness 12345N/A
Submi ts paperwork on time as r equested 12345N/A
Possesses the abi lity to get the pr oject done, lar ge or smal l 12345N/A
Submi ts high-qual ity work 12345N/A
Possesses an appr opriate appear ance 12345N/A
Attitude
Functions compatibly wi th all staff, athletes, and other departments 12345N/A
Is trustworth y with sensi tive information 12345N/A
Does not gossip about coaches, athletic tr ainers, or athletes 12345N/A
Strives for objectiv es as stated in department ’s role and mission statement 12345N/A
Key
1 = Signi ficantly below perf ormance expectations
2 = Minimal ly acceptable perf ormance
3 = Meets perf ormance expectations
4 = Ex ceeds perf ormance expectations
5 = Clearly ex ceptional perf ormance
From National Str ength and Condi tioning Association,  Essentials of Str ength
Training and Condi tioning , 5th ed. , edited by G.G. Haf f and N.T . Triplett (Human
Kinetics, 2027). R eprinted b y permission f rom R.W . Earle,  Staff and F acility Policies
and Pr ocedur es Manual  (Creighton Univ ersity, 1993).
1786
Strength and Conditioning Staff (Personal
Qualifications)
The possession of a certification from an independently accredited
organization, such as the Certified Strength and Condi tioning
Special ist (CSCS) certification, establ ishes a standar d of care. On
August 1, 2015, National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA)
Division I adopted legislati on “to specify that a strength and
condi tioning coach shall be certified and maintai n current
certification through a national ly accredited strength and
condi tioning certi fication pr ogram” (27 , p. 1).
Continuing education is a necessary part of maintaining a
professional certification and reducing liability exposur e, especial ly in
the area of supervision and instruction (1). Litigation issues in this
area often involve questions of “professional instructor
qualifications, ” which include continuing education (30). Thus,
assistant strength and condi tioning professionals should also achiev e
and maintain a professional certification including standar d first aid,
cardiopulmonary resusci tation (CPR), and automated external
defibri llation (AED). (See figure 26.4 for points of preparedness
required of each staf f member .)
Figure 26.4  Staff preparedness checklist.
Maintenance of pr ofessional certi fication
Maintenance of certi fication in standar d first aid, CPR, and AED
Review of emer gency r esponse pr ocedur es
Rudimentary first aid pr ocedur es annual ly
Common tr aining f acility injuries and their pr evention
Building ev acuation plan
Knowledge and understanding of pr ogram pol icies and pr ocedur es
Review of r oom capaci ty and saf e supervision r atios
Review of pr eparticipation scr eening and clear ance pr ocedur e
Review of personal and pr ofessional l iability, negl igence, and insur ance
coverage issues
Knowledge and understanding of go verning body rules and r egulations
1787
Review of gener al knowledge of r egulations
Review of rules speci fic to administering the str ength and condi tioning
program
Knowledge and understanding of cleaning and maintenance issues and
needs
Knowledge and understanding of program philosoph y and instruction
methods
Knowledge of tr aining, tr acking, and testing softw are
Technique and dri ll instruction
Body composi tion guidel ines and nutri tional consul tation
Motiv ational issues, such as pushing athletes bey ond ph ysical l imits,
athletes who o vertrain, or athletes who r efuse to f ollow pr ogram
recommendations
Adapted f rom J.H. Taylor, Performance T raining Pr ogram Manual  (New Mexico
State Univ ersity, 2006).
Additional ly, each staff member needs to understand the strength
and conditioning program’s goals and objectiv es, cooper atively work
with others’ responsibi lities and schedules (e.g., the other members
of the sports medicine team), and maintain a professional code of
conduct.
Appendix A of NSCA Strength and Condi tioning Professional
Standar ds and Guidel ines defines the strength and condi tioning
professional:
Certified Strength and Condi tioning Special ists are professionals
who practical ly apply foundational knowledge to assess,
motiv ate, educate, and train athletes for the primary goal of
improving sports performance. They conduct sport-specific
testing sessions, design and implement safe and effective
strength training and conditioning programs, and provide
guidance for athletes in nutrition and injury prevention.
Recognizing their area of expertise is separ ate and distinct
from the medical, dietetic, athletic training, and sport coaching
fields, Certified Strength and Condi tioning Special ists consult
with and refer athletes to these professionals when
appropriate. (30, p . 13)
1788